<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <title>[PREVIEW] DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly: </title>
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_screen.css"
            media="screen"
            type="text/css"
            rel="stylesheet"/>
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_print.css"
            media="print"
            type="text/css"
            rel="stylesheet"/>
      <style type="text/css">
        #mainContent {
          float: none;
          padding-top: 2em;
          padding-left: 4em;
          padding-right: 4em;
          margin-left: 225px;
           
        }</style>
      <script src="../../common/js/javascriptLibrary.js" type="text/javascript"/>
   </head>
   <body>
      <div id="mainContent">
         <div xmlns:dhqBiblio="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/ns/biblio"
              class="DHQarticle">
            <div id="pubInfo">Preview<br/>Volume 009 Number 2</div>
            <div class="toolbar">
               <form id="taporware" action="get">
                  <div>
                     <a href="/dhq/preview/index.html">Preview</a>
                     | 
                    <a rel="external" href="/dhq/vol/9/2/000208.xml">XML</a>

| 
		   Discuss
			(<a href="/dhq/vol/9/2/000208/000208.html#disqus_thread"
                        data-disqus-identifier="000208">
				Comments
			</a>)
                </div>
               </form>
            </div>
            <div class="DHQheader">
               <h1 class="articleTitle">Beyond the Margins: Intersectionality and the Digital
               Humanities</h1>
               <div class="author">
                  <span style="color: grey">Roopika Risam</span> &lt;<a href="mailto:rrisam_at_salemstate_dot_edu"
                     onclick="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('rrisam_at_salemstate_dot_edu'); return false;"
                     onkeypress="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('rrisam_at_salemstate_dot_edu'); return false;">rrisam_at_salemstate_dot_edu</a>&gt;, Salem State University</div>
               <span xmlns=""
                     class="Z3988"
                     title="url_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;rft_val_fmt=info%3Aofi%2Ffmt%3Akev%3Amtx%3Ajournal&amp;rfr_id=info%3Asid%2Fzotero.org%3A2&amp;rft.genre=article&amp;rft.atitle=Beyond%20the%20Margins%3A%20Intersectionality%20and%20the%20Digital%20Humanities&amp;rft.jtitle=Digital%20Humanities%20Quarterly&amp;rft.stitle=DHQ&amp;rft.issn=1938-4122&amp;rft.date=2015-05-22&amp;rft.volume=009&amp;rft.issue=2&amp;rft.aulast=Risam&amp;rft.aufirst=Roopika&amp;rft.au=Roopika%20Risam"> </span>
            </div>
            <div id="DHQtext">
               <div id="abstract">
                  <h2>Abstract</h2>
                  <p>This article examines the relationship between intersectionality and the digital
               humanities. Intersectionality offers a critical approach to debates between theory
               and method in the field, transcending simplistic hack vs. yack binaries. This article
               situates debates over difference in the digital humanities within the context of the
               culture wars within the U.S. academy during the 1980s and 1990s, locating the stakes
               for diversity in the digital humanities. It surveys digital humanities projects,
               outlining the need for alternate histories of the digital humanities told through
               intersectional lenses. Finally, the article proposes ways of looking forward towards
               the deeper intersectional analysis needed to expand intellectual diversity in the
               field and move difference beyond the margins of the digital humanities.</p>
               </div>
               <div class="div div0">
                  <h1 class="head">Introduction</h1>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p1">1</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p1">While digital humanities has grown, so too has the number of voices making the case
               for attention to race, class, gender, sexuality, ability, nationality, and other
               categories of identity in the field. Increasing numbers of panels at the annual
               meetings of Digital Humanities; Modern Language Association; American Studies
               Association; American Historical Association; National Women’s Studies Association;
               and Humanities, Arts, Science, and Technology Alliance and Collaboratory (HASTAC)
               examine the role of difference in digital humanities scholarship. In today’s
                  "digital humanities moment"[<a class="ref" href="#gold2013">Gold 2013</a>], the field often re-encounters the growing pains of the "eternal September of the digital humanities" [<a class="ref" href="#nowviskie2013">Nowviskie 2013</a>]. As a result, recurring questions insist on the need for cultural critique in
               the field: "Where is cultural criticism in the digital
                     humanities?" [<a class="ref" href="#liu2013">Liu 2013</a>], "Can we describe digital archives as feminist?" [<a class="ref" href="#wernimont2013">Wernimont 2013</a>], "Why are the digital humanities so white?" [<a class="ref" href="#mcpherson2013">McPherson 2013</a>], and "Can information be
                  unfettered?" [<a class="ref" href="#earhart2013">Earhart 2013</a>]. The persistence of these questions demonstrates the
               need for more answers to the pressing matter of inclusion and exclusion within the
               field.</div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p2">2</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p2">A recent special issue of the journal <cite class="title italic">differences</cite>,
                  "In the Shadow of the Digital Humanities," considers
               the fraught relationship between digital humanities and diversity. The call for
               papers for the Canadian Society for Digital Humanities and Association for Computers
               and the Humanities joint conference encourages proposals from "women, people of color, LGBTQ, or other under-represented groups" [<a class="ref" href="#saklofske2014">Saklofske 2014</a>]. The 2015 Digital Diversity conference in Edmonton
               celebrates the 20<span class="hi superscript">th</span> anniversary of <cite class="title italic">The Orlando Project</cite> and asks, "Have decades of
                  digital studies enhanced, altered, or muted the project to recover and represent
                  more diverse histories of writers, thinkers, and artists positioned differently by
                  gender, race, ethnicity, sexualities, social class, and/or global
                  location?" [<a class="ref" href="#digitaldiversity2015">Digital Diversity 2015</a>]. Such calls suggest that scholars within
               digital humanities have begun recognizing the need for inclusive representation and a
               critical approach that foregrounds intellectual diversity within the field. </div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p3">3</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p3">Resistance to the utility of cultural criticism abounds. Notably, Matthew
               Kirschenbaum argues many critics target a construct of "digital
                  humanities" rather than the varied range of projects that comprise the
               field [<a class="ref" href="#kirschenbaum2014">Kirschenbaum 2014</a>]. In distinguishing between a discursive
               subject of criticism and material praxis, he echoes debates over the "hack
                  vs. yack" binary – doing vs. theorizing – that have taken place in the
               field [<a class="ref" href="#ramsay2011">Ramsay 2011</a>]; [<a class="ref" href="#cecire2011">Cecire 2011</a>]; [<a class="ref" href="#schmidt2011">Schmidt 2011</a>]; [<a class="ref" href="#jones2013">Jones 2013</a>]. Invoking a division between
               the two has been something of a stock move, used in equal measure to call digital
               humanists untheoretical [<a class="ref" href="#bauer2011">Bauer 2011</a>] and to distance digital humanities
               from the messy realities of race, gender, sexuality, class, and other forms of
               difference [<a class="ref" href="#smith2007">Smith 2007</a>]. As Bethany Nowviskie notes, the binary has
               become a strawman for a false claim of a "fundamental opposition
                  in thinking between humanities theorists and deliberately anti-theoretical DH
                     'builders'" [<a class="ref" href="#nowviskie2014">Nowviskie 2014</a>]. The division between "hack" and
                  "yack" has been complicated by the idea of tacit knowledge [<a class="ref" href="#turkel2010">Turkel 2010</a>] that emerges from "journeyman learning
                  experiences" [<a class="ref" href="#nowviskie2012">Nowviskie 2012</a>] and by the intimate link between building and knowing
               within the field [<a class="ref" href="#rockwell2011">Rockwell 2011</a>]; [<a class="ref" href="#scheinfeldt2010a">Scheinfeldt 2010a</a>].
               Yet, the binary persists, both in questionable arguments that cultural criticism
               targets a discursive construction of the field alone and invalid claims that an
               emphasis on building makes digital humanities untheoretical.</div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p4">4</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p4">The relationship between theory and praxis is integral to the digital humanities.
               Connections between the two appear in the archives built, corpora analyzed, oral
               histories recorded, and geographies mapped. As Alan Liu has suggested, the practices
               of digital humanities make engagement with cultural critique online possible [<a class="ref" href="#liu2013">Liu 2013</a>]. In turn, theory contributes to the development of the field’s
               metadiscourse and enables a critical look at material practices, including their
               omissions. Those of us who work with issues of difference often perceive the ways
               that many digital humanities projects fail to engage with race, gender, disability,
               class, sexuality, or a combination thereof. Some of the most developed digital
               humanities work – The Rossetti Archive, The Walt Whitman Archive, The William Blake
               Archive – preserve the writing of dead white men, specifically individuals unlikely
               to be forgotten in Anglophone literary history even if these projects did not exist.
               There are practical explanations for such subjects. For example, the body of pre-1923
               public domain material digitized and ready for study privileges canonical writers and
               texts. As Earhart argues, fewer scholars are working with digital textual recovery
               and diversifying the available texts [<a class="ref" href="#earhart2013">Earhart 2013</a>]. Yet, as Skye
               Bianco has argued, the consolidation of digital humanities as a recognizable field
               for institutions and grantors has led to exposure for "disciplinarily legible projects" that rely on canonicity for
               justification, yielding a field that trades on "its kinship to
                  much older modes of humanistic study" [<a class="ref" href="#bianco2013">Bianco 2013</a>]. Bianco describes this trend as a form of
                  "retro-humanism" that does not account for recent developments
               in the humanities, like cultural studies, feminism, postcolonial studies, critical
               race studies, or queer studies [<a class="ref" href="#bianco2013">Bianco 2013</a>]. Earhart proposes that
               digital humanities might intervene by reviving digital textual recovery work and
               identifying the omissions of the canon: "crucial work by women,
                  people of color, and the GLBTQ community" [<a class="ref" href="#earhart2013">Earhart 2013</a>]. The stakes here are high; as digital humanities becomes
               the public face of the humanities through organizations like 4Humanities and HASTAC,
               retro-humanism cannot be the order of the day. Without attention to the omissions
               that exist within digital humanities scholarship, the field risks replicating the
               exclusions of a dominant culture that already relegates difference to its
               margins.</div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p5">5</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p5">To avoid this pitfall, we need critical approaches that transcend false binaries
               between "hack" and "yack." Intersectionality is
               one such frame that offers a way of examining the history of digital humanities to
               identify strategies for greater intellectual diversity in the field.
               Intersectionality originates in the work of Kimberlé Crenshaw, a legal scholar who
               sought a model for understanding the relationship between race, gender, and violence
               against women of color. The concept articulates Crenshaw’s perception that "the experiences of women of color are frequently the product of
                  intersecting patterns of racism and sexism" [<a class="ref" href="#crenshaw1991">Crenshaw 1991</a>, 1243]. Through her research with women living in
               shelters, Crenshaw saw the ways the women encountered "burdens,
                  largely the consequence of gender and class oppression...compounded by the
                  racially discriminatory employment and housing practices women of color often
                  face, as well as by the disproportionately high unemployment among people of
                  color" [<a class="ref" href="#crenshaw1991">Crenshaw 1991</a>, 1245–1246]. Crenshaw proposes that "multilayered and routinized forms of domination...often
                  converge" to shape the experiences and limit the opportunities of women of
               color – black women in particular – whose concerns are not adequately represented by
               either anti-racist or feminist discourse alone [<a class="ref" href="#crenshaw1991">Crenshaw 1991</a>, 1245]. From Crenshaw’s grounded analysis in the 1980s to now, intersectionality has come
               to signify the ways that oppression manifests through multiple facets of identity
               that confer or withhold privilege, unearned advantages that accrue to individuals on
               the basis of their identities [<a class="ref" href="#mcintosh1990">McIntosh 1990</a>]. In its more expansive
               definition, intersectionality is generally understood to look beyond the
               race-class-gender triad described by Crenshaw to additional axes of difference
               including sexuality and ability. As a lens for scholarship in the digital humanities,
               intersectionality resists binary logic, encourages complex analysis, and foregrounds
               difference.</div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p6">6</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p6">This article proposes that intersectionality is a viable approach to cultural
               criticism in the digital humanities, enabling us to write alternate histories of the
               field that transcend simplistic "hack" vs.
                  "yack" binaries. I begin by situating debates over difference
               in the digital humanities within the larger context of the culture wars within the US
               academy in the 1980s and 1990s to locate the stakes of diversity within the field.
               Then, I suggest what an intersectional approach to digital humanities might look like
               and offer a survey of projects through an intersectional lens. Finally, I suggest
               ways the field might look forward towards deeper intersectional analysis needed to
               develop a transformed, inclusive digital humanities. </div>
               </div>
               <div class="div div0">
                  <h1 class="head">The Lessons of Theory</h1>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p7">7</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p7">In 2009, William Pannapacker called digital humanities "the next
                  big thing," a move that recalls the rise of critical theory, the
                  <em class="emph">last</em> big thing to shape the humanities [<a class="ref" href="#pannapacker2009">Pannapacker 2009</a>]. Responses to digital humanities from cultural critics in the mainstream press
               often echo the culture wars of the late 1980s and early 1990s, the struggle within
               the US academy over the fraught relationship between literature and theory. As the
               story goes, with the advent of theory, Shakespeare was going to be jettisoned for
               Saussure, Defoe for Derrida. Cultural critic Roger Kimball argued that "ideological posturing, pop culture, and hermetic word games"
               were supplanting humanities education [<a class="ref" href="#kimball1990">Kimball 1990</a>, 11]. Critics
               of the digital humanities have made analogous charges. For example, Adam Kirsch
               suggests, "...the very idea of language as the basis of humane
                  education – even of human identity – seems to give way to a post- or pre-verbal
                  discourse of pictures and objects. Digital humanities becomes another name for the
                  obsequies of humanism" [<a class="ref" href="#kirsch2014">Kirsch 2014</a>]. Digital humanities reduces literature to
                  "data." Distant reading is destroying close reading.</div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p8">8</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p8">History repeats itself in other ways too. The backlash against theory for its elision
               of difference resonates with arguments for cultural critique within digital
               humanities. Along with theory came criticism of its rise from black, ethnic, and
               women’s studies. Many scholars in these fields were conscious of their hard-won gains
               during the 1960s and 1970s – establishing academic departments and journals and
               having their work recognized as scholarship – and worried their position within the
               academy would be jeopardized by the arrival of theory in the 1980s. They did not see
               theoretical models based on the work of Karl Marx, Michel Foucault, and Jacques
               Derrida as schools of thought that promoted their goals. Rather, they viewed the rise
               of theory in opposition to their work, which was located not in continental
               philosophy but in lived experiences of difference in the U.S. </div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p9">9</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p9">In her essay "The Race for Theory," Barbara Christian
               writes about the growing importance of theory in the academy in the late 1980s,
               articulating concerns about inclusion and exclusion that are strikingly relevant to
               the digital humanities. She begins, "The New Philosophers, eager
                  to understand a world that is today fast escaping their political control, have
                  redefined literature so that the distinctions implied by the term…have been
                  blurred. They have changed literary critical language to suit their own purposes
                  as philosophers, and they have reinvented the meaning of theory" [<a class="ref" href="#christian1987">Christian 1987</a>, 51]. Just as theory’s "New
                  Philosophers" have begun transforming literary studies through theory,
               so too are digital humanists opening up new possibilities for scholarship.
               Christian’s "literary critical language" is digital
               humanities’ "methodologies." She anticipates a shift in the
               landscape of the academy, wondering what will happen to radical critics if theory
               becomes a defining part of literary scholarship and a commodity for appointment,
               tenure, and promotion. Christian sees the possibility of radical critique being
               domesticated as "black, women, [and] third world" scholars
               invested in intersectional approaches to literature are coerced into adopting the
               language of theory and "speaking a language and defining their
                  discussion in terms alien to and opposed to our needs and orientations" [<a class="ref" href="#christian1987">Christian 1987</a>, 52]. Likewise, scholars in the digital humanities
               advocating for cultural critique recognize that engaging with difference is not only
               a question of representation but also one of method.</div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p10">10</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p10">Digital humanities scholars who work with difference fear for its viability, much
               like Christian and her colleagues worried about their relationship to theory in the
               1980s. Will black, ethnic, and women’s studies be legible within digital humanities?
               Will other forms of difference – gender, sexuality, ability – have a place in the
               field as well? Scholars who take up these issues focus on the ways digital humanities
               intersects with how we engage difference in our work. These approaches are grounded
               in core questions of difference above, articulated by Alan Liu, Jacqueline Wernimont,
               Tara McPherson, and Amy Earhart, among others. Newer groups within digital humanities
               have been inspired by their concerns. For example, #transformDH is "an academic guerilla movement seeking to (re)define capital-letter
                  Digital Humanities as a force for transformative scholarship by collecting,
                  sharing, and highlighting projects that push at its boundaries and work for social
                  justice, accessibility, and inclusion" [<a class="ref" href="#transformdh2012">transformDH 2012</a>]. The roots of #transformDH lie in "intersectional critical cultural studies” such as “critical race and
                  ethnic studies; feminist, gender, queer studies; postcolonial, transnational,
                  diaspora; disability studies; DIY (Add your own!)" [<a class="ref" href="#conghuyen2013">Cong-Huyen 2013</a>]. As a result, #transformDH operates under the
               assertion that "gender, sexuality, race, nationality, and ability
                  are all central to how we encounter and participate in digital humanities"
               and that "we must work collectively towards transformative,
                  social justice oriented engagements" [<a class="ref" href="#conghuyen2013">Cong-Huyen 2013</a>]. Similarly, Postcolonial Digital Humanities, or
               #dhpoco, has sought to build a community of scholars working at the intersections of
               postcolonial studies and the digital humanities, to promote "global explorations of race, class, gender, sexuality, and disability within
                  cultures of technology" [<a class="ref" href="#risam2013">Risam 2013</a>]. Another initiative, Global Outlook::Digital Humanities
               (GO::DH), a special interest group of the Alliance of Digital Humanities
               Organizations (ADHO), fosters communication and collaboration around the world,
               navigating not only geographic but also economic difference and the practical
               challenges of embracing multilingualism within ADHO. The organization has supported
               the development of regional and linguistic tracks like South Asian Digital
               Humanities, Red Humanidades Digitales, and Associação das Humanidades Digitais; a
               whisper campaign to facilitate on-the-fly translations at the Digital Humanities 2014
               meeting; and Alex Gil’s <cite class="title italic">Around DH in 80 Days</cite> website
               that showcases the international scope of projects. Groups like #transformDH,
               Postcolonial Digital Humanities, and GO::DH situate their missions at the
               intersections of multiple axes of difference, recognizing the need for attention to
               the complex power relations that serve as barriers to achieving inclusivity within
               the digital humanities. </div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p11">11</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p11">The recent popularity of digital humanities obscures a longer history of which these
               initiatives are part. Just as Christian pushes back against the newness of theory and
               argues, "people of color have always theorized" [<a class="ref" href="#christian1987">Christian 1987</a>, 52], there are earlier, oft-unrecognized
               instances of digital humanities work that engages with difference. Since the 1990s,
               Afrofuturist scholars have been framing technoculture through intersectional lenses.
               Afrofuturism is an African American literary and artistic movement that foregrounds
               speculative approaches to displacement, belonging, and home for the African diaspora.
               Its literary dimensions encompass science and speculative fiction by writers like
               Nalo Hopkinson, Octavia Butler, and Samuel R. Delaney, while its critical angle has
               considered the ways that blackness, gender, class, and sexuality intersect in
               technoculture. Alondra Nelson created the Afrofuturism listserv in the 1990s to
               examine futurist themes in African diasporic cultural production, blackness in
               science fiction, and the possibilities of black technoculture. Her 2001 edited volume
                  <cite class="title italic">Technicolor: Race, Technology, and Everyday Life</cite>
               (with Thuy Linh Tu) was one of the first collections to consider the influence of
               racial politics on technoculture, and she also edited a 2002 issue of <cite class="title italic">Social Text</cite> on Afrofuturism, with an emphasis on how new
               media, culture, and technology influence the African Diaspora. Kali Tal, who
               developed the Afrofuturism website, is perhaps best known for her article "Life Behind the Screen," which considers omissions in
               cyberculture scholarship in the mid-1990s [<a class="ref" href="#tal1996">Tal 1996</a>]. Scholars like
               W.E.B. Du Bois, she argues, have been theorizing identity in ways useful for but
               largely ignored by cyberculture studies. This body of work, which situates the
               African diaspora within the digital milieu, exists alongside early efforts at textual
               recovery for African American studies during the 1990s. As Earhart has suggested,
               projects like <cite class="title italic">The Charles Chesnutt Archive</cite> and <cite class="title italic">Race and Place: An African-American Community in the Jim Crow
                  South</cite> embraced the affordances of emerging Internet technologies to resist
               canon bias among early digital projects [<a class="ref" href="#earhart2013">Earhart 2013</a>]. To recognize
               this work within digital humanities is to embrace the possibilities of digital
               cultural recovery for the African diaspora. Earhart herself has begun archiving and
               recovering early work through her project <cite class="title italic">The Diverse History of
                  Digital Humanities</cite>. </div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p12">12</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p12">Another area of scholarship that inspires digital humanities scholars invested in
               intersectionality is new media studies, which has been asking difficult questions
               about difference and the Internet since the 2000s. Lisa Nakamura’s work interrogates
               the ways that online experiences shape perceptions of race, ethnicity, and identity,
               drawing on critical race theory as she identifies a relationship between operations
               of stereotypes online and offline [<a class="ref" href="#nakamura2002">Nakamura 2002</a>]; [<a class="ref" href="#nakamura2012">Nakamura 2012</a>]. She further suggests that the Internet is a space of
               re-embodiment along the lines of race and gender, as biotechnologies and other forces
               shape the online body [<a class="ref" href="#nakamura2007">Nakamura 2007</a>]. Similarly, Wendy Chun has
               examined how superficial views of difference have led to troubling beliefs that
               online spaces are disembodied and therefore insulated from the realities of social
               inequalities [<a class="ref" href="#chun2001">Chun 2001</a>]; [<a class="ref" href="#chun2005">Chun 2005</a>]. Anna Everett also
               takes up related issues, ranging from race in the digital public sphere [<a class="ref" href="#everett2002">Everett 2002</a>] to black public life and black women’s experiences online
                  [<a class="ref" href="#everett2009">Everett 2009</a>] and the influence of intersectional forms of
               difference in video games [<a class="ref" href="#everett2014">Everett 2014</a>]. Bringing a postcolonial lens
               to these debates, Pramod Nayar argues that technologized bodies are "raced, gendered, and classed, and situated in particular social, and
                  economic, and cultural contexts" and emphasizes the importance of
               acknowledging subalternity in cyberspace [<a class="ref" href="#nayar2010">Nayar 2010</a>, 66]. Drawing
               on theories of globalization as well as postcolonial studies, Radhika Gajjala
               examines the nature of South Asian technospaces, the effects of microfinance and
               peer-to-peer lending on women’s craft communities, and the ways silence and voice are
               shaped online, insisting on the relationship between the local, global, and digital
                  [<a class="ref" href="#gajjala2008">Gajjala 2008</a>]; [<a class="ref" href="#gajjala2012">Gajjala 2012</a>]. Attending to questions
               of media and migration, Isabelle Rigoni argues that intersectionality is an important
               tool for analyzing ethnic minority media. She suggests that while representation is
               increasingly happening in digital media, little attention has been paid to how race,
               gender, and postcolonial migration together "produce and maintain
                  the unequal distribution of power in the mediascape" [<a class="ref" href="#rigoni2012">Rigoni 2012</a>, 834]. Her work situates the affordances of
               intersectionality for analysis of digital media, arguing that it "provide[s] an important analytical and conceptual tool for enabling us to
                  understand gender, race, and class, as dimensions of social identities in
                  transition, especially as reflected in the media" [<a class="ref" href="#rigoni2012">Rigoni 2012</a>, 835]. Ben Aslinger and Nina Huntemann also identify
               a relationship between new media studies and intersectionality, suggesting that new
               media studies may be a safe space for intersectional analysis and a challenge to the
                  "often described conflation/caricature of the new media
                  scholar as an apolitical white heterosexual male academic" [<a class="ref" href="#aslinger2013">Aslinger 2013</a>, 11]. Together, these developments in new media
               speak to the strides that feminist, queer, and critical race theory scholars have
               made in interrogating the relationship between digital media and multiple categories
               of identity, changing the ways we understand the relationship between networks,
               digital media, and subjectivity. </div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p13">13</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p13">Recent calls for intersectional analysis in digital humanities are further indebted
               to Sandra Harding’s ground-breaking work in feminist and postcolonial science and
               technology studies, which considers the relationship between feminist ways of knowing
               in scientific paradigms, the role of multiculturalism in science studies, and the
               imperialist foundations of European and American science [<a class="ref" href="#harding1998">Harding 1998</a>]; [<a class="ref" href="#harding2008">Harding 2008</a>]. This scholarship speaks to the relationship between
               difference and technology in a range of intersectional forms. Implications for
               digital humanities include the emphasis on technoscience, which enables critical
               analysis of the materiality of digital and computational technologies in relation to
               power, embodiment, and difference. Emphasizing that technologies themselves are
               implicated in intersectionality, Claire Potter has suggested, "New digital technologies have their own history, one that is recent to be sure,
                  but that nevertheless resonates to historical questions of race, class, gender,
                  nationalism, and sexuality that are at the heart of a feminist intellectual
                  enterprise" [<a class="ref" href="#potter2013">Potter 2010</a>, 358]. Together, these scholarly contributions to
               difference in technoculture have places in the alternate histories we must write
               about the digital humanities. They offer models that foreshadow the role of
               intersectional analysis in the field by making the case that engagement with
               computational technologies is inextricably linked to questions of history, culture,
               identity, and difference. They hint at methods that advocate inclusion and critical
               analysis but are situated in the materiality of technologies – the very methods
               central to an intersectional approach to digital humanities. </div>
               </div>
               <div class="div div0">
                  <h1 class="head">Towards an Intersectional Digital Humanities</h1>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p14">14</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p14">These concerns are vital to the analytical work of digital humanities, the
               computational technologies developed or used to produce scholarship, and the ways
               projects are designed. Like any scholarly field, digital humanities veers towards the
               monolithic, constructing centers and peripheries. Every definition is necessarily
               exclusionary but the task of defining is an inevitable part of academic practice.
               Yet, acts of exclusion often come at the expense of those who inhabit the margins and
               whose identities are shaped by intersecting axes of difference. This phenomenon
               manifests in multiple ways, from the presumptive white maleness of digital humanities
                  [<a class="ref" href="#bailey2011">Bailey 2011</a>] to the canon bias within the field [<a class="ref" href="#earhart2013">Earhart 2013</a>]; [<a class="ref" href="#bianco2013">Bianco 2013</a>]. That is to say, this is not
               only a matter of the diversity of individuals within digital humanities but also of
               intellectual diversity. Therefore, it is incumbent on those at the center of the
               digital humanities to understand the position of those whose work dwells in the
               peripheries, to understand the historical legacies that link knowledge production
               with the denigration – even the destruction – of that which is other.</div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p15">15</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p15">What I offer here is the beginning of a genealogy that identifies the influences of
               intersectionality on digital humanities, in its approach to theory and practice. I
               chart the ways intersectionality has been part of conversations in the digital
               humanities and survey projects in which we might find hints of intersectionality.
               These are the traces on which we might build to properly situate intersectionality as
               critical approach to the field. Broad in range, hallmarks of intersectionality in
               digital humanities include common sense advice for cultivating a diverse community,
               theoretical models for understanding the ways difference shapes digital practices,
               applied theoretical models that position intersectionality as an already existing but
               oft-overlooked part of computation, and practical tweaks like acknowledging
               inclusions and exclusions in data or developing search functions that enable
               intersectional engagement. Projects that are explicitly intersectional in their
               design and development are more rare but nonetheless essential. </div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p16">16</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p16">Among early voices advocating for a theoretically intersectional approach to digital
               humanities is Martha Nell Smith, who proposes that the rigor of the field depends on
               it. She suggests, "Our pliant and accommodating standards need also to be more
                     interdisciplinary and take into account the 'messy' facts of
                     authorship, production, and reception: race, class, gender, and
                     sexuality" [<a class="ref" href="#smith2007">Smith 2007</a>, 2]. Undertaking such a task of "embracing messy humanity in
                  all its diversities" is, according to Smith, "no longer
                  a luxury for our community, it is a necessity" [<a class="ref" href="#smith2007">Smith 2007</a>, 2]. More recently, Smith has issued a call to
               integrate feminist, critical race, sexuality, and class-based analysis into digital
               humanities, particularly in digital archival practice. Such an approach would address
               questions like "How have these items of knowledge and the organizations and
                     working groups who made them come into being? Who has stakes in their
                     presentation? What is visible in these new media archives and what might not
                     be? Can what is invisible but relevant be known to users of new digital
                     archives?" [<a class="ref" href="#smith2014">Smith 2014</a>, 409]. To thaw the "frozen social relations" [<a class="ref" href="#smith2014">Smith 2014</a>, 404] that she identifies within digital humanities
               scholarship, Smith suggests, "Producers should make every effort to make clear what has
                     been occluded by remediation, by principles and practices of selection, and to
                     unfreeze old binaries of authority and involve users in knowledge
                     production" [<a class="ref" href="#smith2014">Smith 2014</a>, 409]. That is to say, digital humanities scholarship must be self-reflexive,
               interrogating its own positionality within the broader landscape of knowledge
               production, along axes of difference. </div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p17">17</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p17">Another consideration is the tensions evoked by engagement with difference in the
               digital humanities. The field is beleaguered by its own creation myths and investment
               in "niceness,""collegiality," and "openness." Tom Scheinfeldt
               attributes this niceness to the field’s investment in method, suggesting that
               methodological debates are easier to resolve than theoretical ones [<a class="ref" href="#scheinfeldt2010b">Scheinfeldt 2010b</a>]. Conversely, Bianco has proposed that depictions of
               digital humanities as the "cool kids’ table" from outside the
               field and the emphasis on niceness within mean digital humanities is "constructing itself through the competing narratives of privileged,
                  middle-class, white high-school politics in tension with privileged, middle-class,
                  white people who work 'nicely' together" [<a class="ref" href="#bianco2013">Bianco 2013</a>]. These issues – niceness, method, difference, theory –
               came to the fore in responses to Miriam Posner’s essay about coding. While not
               opposed to code, Posner identifies the way that knowledge of coding plays out along
               gendered, classed, and racialized lines, noting that "men –
                  middle-class white men" are more likely to have been encouraged to engage
               with computational technology at a young age [<a class="ref" href="#posner2012">Posner 2012</a>]. Identifying
               the intersectional structural biases influencing trends in who is most likely to know
               how to code, Posner suggests, "If you [digital humanists] want women and people of color in
                     your community, if it is important to you to have a diverse discipline, you
                     need to do something besides exhort us to code" [<a class="ref" href="#posner2012">Posner 2012</a>]. Responses to Posner’s post, which included dissent, revealed how
               misunderstood the connection between theory and method can be. She responded by
               linking method – coding – to theory – arguing, "Let’s make
                  inequities of power something else we decide to abandon" and proposing
               guidelines for intersectional engagement in the digital humanities community: "1. Let’s think about ways to build communities of
                     underrepresented people...2. Let’s acknowledge that we all do racist and sexist
                     stuff sometimes...3. Let’s talk about when our niceness could be shutting down
                     important conversations...4. Let’s believe people when they tell us they feel
                     uncomfortable" [<a class="ref" href="#posner2012">Posner 2012</a>]. Here, Posner identifies the influence of difference, arguably a theoretical
               concern, on method. These guidelines are a precondition to an intersectional response
               to difference in digital humanities that embraces the relationship between theory and
               method. </div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p18">18</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p18">Approaching difference by blending Smith’s recommendations for intersectional
               analysis and Posner’s community guidelines reveals the ways the field is already
               informed by intersectionality. As Bianco has suggested, computational scholarship
               already is "a radically heterogeneous and a multimodally layered
                  – read, not visible – set of practices, constraints and codifications that operate
                  below the level of user interaction" [<a class="ref" href="#bianco2013">Bianco 2013</a>]. In that layer, operations of intersectionality may be
               visible if we look for them. Accordingly, Bianco notes, "Our ethics, methods and theory are <em class="emph">not
                        transparent</em> in our tools, unless you have the serious know-how to
                     critically make them or hack them" [<a class="ref" href="#bianco2013">Bianco 2013</a>]. While digital humanists themselves may have access to that layer by virtue of
               technical skill, users engaging with digital humanities scholarship may not.
               Similarly, Smith argues, "Tools cannot be separated from the
                  knowledge systems in which they have been imagined and made" but proposes
               we might frame intersectional practices as tools themselves [<a class="ref" href="#smith2014">Smith 2014</a>, 408]. To do so would ensure that digital humanities scholarship unsettles
               essentialist categories, rather than reifying existing assumptions about race,
               gender, class, ability, sexuality, or other categories of difference. Therefore, it
               is incumbent on us to make the critical layers visible to users in the apparatus
               developed around our work. </div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p19">19</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p19">By approaching intersectionality in the digital humanities at the juncture of
               disciplinary knowledge and technical specification, we blend theory and method and
               avoid what Moya Bailey calls "the add and stir model of
                  diversity, a practice of sprinkling in more women, people of color, disabled folks
                  and assuming that is enough to change current paradigms" [<a class="ref" href="#bailey2011">Bailey 2011</a>]. Bailey frames this issue in intersectional terms,
               proposing, "This identity based mixing does little to address the
                  structural parameters that are set up when a homogeneous group has been at the
                  center and don’t automatically engender understanding across forms of
                  difference" [<a class="ref" href="#bailey2011">Bailey 2011</a>]. Axes of difference are fluid and converge in multiple
               ways. For example, the considerations necessary for a project on black lesbian
               activism would necessarily be different from one on oral histories of Latina
               transwomen; these might range from technical specifications to design principles to
               issues of safety that a public project might raise. As a result, there is not simply
               one way of doing intersectional digital humanities. Rather, it is a provisional lens
               that suggests practitioners begin their work with an understanding of the
               particularities necessary to design projects that account for influences of
               difference on knowledge-production. To date, we have few alternatives that enable
               such an approach. For example, Kara Keeling’s "Queer OS"
               or "queer operating system" suggests that a queer perspective, broadly
               construed, would change how we view technology. Queer OS "would
                  take historical, sociocultural, conceptual phenomena that currently shape our
                  realities in deep and profound ways, such as race, gender, class citizenship, and
                  ability … to be mutually constitutive with sexuality and with media and
                  information technologies, thereby making it impossible to think of any of them in
                  isolation" [<a class="ref" href="#keeling2014">Keeling 2014</a>, 153]. By viewing "queer" as an operating
               system, Keeling proposes to decenter social norms in favor of their alternatives.
               Moreover, she frames Queer OS in intersectional terms, emphasizing the relationship
               between sexuality and other categories like race, ability, and nationality. Offering
               another alternative, Fobazi M. Ettarh interrogates the relationship between Boolean
               search terms and intersectional identity. Describing her experiences in library
               school, she notes, "I am proof that these [race, gender, and
                  sexuality] are not separate issues. I am not Black one day and Queer the next.
                  Instead, I am Black AND Queer. In Principles of Searching we learn how important
                  and, or, and nor are in Boolean searching. Too long the environment has been Black
                  OR Queer" [<a class="ref" href="#ettarh2013">Ettarh 2013</a>]. As such, she identifies a conceptual fit between
               intersectionality and structures of information. These issues are further explored by
               Alexis Lothian and Amanda Phillips who ask, "Can digital
                  humanities mean transformative critique?" [<a class="ref" href="#lothian2013">Lothian 2013</a>]. They argue that if scholars in fields like ethnic
               studies, gender studies, cultural studies, disability studies, or queer studies are
               engaging with technology in their scholarship, they should "lay
                  claim to our place within digital humanities" [<a class="ref" href="#lothian2013">Lothian 2013</a>]. Through such an intersectional bent Lothian and
               Phillips look forward to transformative digital humanities "where
                  neither the digital nor the humanities will be terms taken for granted" [<a class="ref" href="#lothian2013">Lothian 2013</a>]. These theoretical perspectives offer models of how
               intersectionality operates in relationship to the digital humanities, from the nature
               of computation itself to the way we constitute relationships between the humanistic
               inquiry and the digital. </div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p20">20</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p20">In additional to theoretical precursors, we have projects that, in their own ways,
               provide models for how to approach digital humanities through an intersectional lens.
               An acknowledgment of the inclusions and exclusions within a data set or the source
               material is an important start. Allison Booth’s <cite class="title italic">Collective
                  Biographies of Women</cite>[<a class="ref" href="#cbw">CBW</a>], for example, focuses on prosopography, or collective biography,
               a genre of text comprised of short biographies. Using print volumes and digital
               resources like Project Gutenberg or Google Books, <cite class="title italic">CBW</cite>
               compiles biographical narratives and develops tools for prosopography. The project’s
                  "About" page offers an important model of how projects
               can be positioned in intersectional terms: <blockquote>
                        <p>Prosopography must be
                  selective, but it can claim a share of attention for marginal identities. Most
                  women have gone missing in history and have no printed memorial. The
                  Anglo-American catalogues in CBW tended to exclude all but the rare working woman,
                  woman of color, or woman who did not belong to the Christian middle class of
                  English descent. Religious nonconformists and various minorities nevertheless
                  began to use this tool of recognition. The collections camouflage or accept some
                  examples of diverse sexuality and same-sex relationships and many examples of
                  single or old women. It is high-ranking women who pursue heterosexual affairs who
                  get censured in these books — but not always or not with conviction. Some books
                  celebrate opposites of the "good woman" type. The limitations
                  of the lists – and any canons or lists – notwithstanding, a search through this
                  bibliography and the books it registers helps to correct some distorted
                  generalizations about the lack of records of women in the past. [<a class="ref" href="#cbw">CBW</a>]</p>
                     </blockquote>
                  </div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p21">21</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p21">The project’s "Pop Chart" or index of most frequently
               recurring subjects indicates a bias towards white European or American women, with
               Pocahontas and Cleopatra being notable exceptions. However, the <cite class="title italic">CBW</cite>’s proactive foregrounding of questions of race, class, gender, and
               sexuality in the fashioning of the project is a fitting model of how to engage with
               intersectional digital humanities. Key here is making the intersecting phenomena that
               shape a project visible even though they may not be readily understood. <cite class="title italic">The Orlando Project</cite> does this as well. <cite class="title italic">Orlando</cite> examines women’s literary history but its focus on women’s
               writing may obscure its intersectional underpinnings upon first glance. However, the
               scholarly introduction to the project notes that while gender is "an indispensable tool for historical analysis," the project creators
                  "see gender as one among other constituents of
                  identity" [<a class="ref" href="#orlando">Orlando</a>]. Therefore, the project includes documents that examine
               race, class, sexuality or other categories of difference to illuminate the “cultural
               formation” of writers. Identifying such a frame, the project makes clear that its
               engagement with gender is situated in the flexible and provisional spirit of
               intersectionality. </div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p22">22</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p22">A project might also structure its search mechanism to optimize intersectional
               analysis. Brad Pasanek’s <cite class="title italic">The Mind is a Metaphor</cite>
               database, for example, makes clear that its scope and textual sources only cover
                  18<span class="hi superscript">th</span> century British metaphors [<a class="ref" href="#pasanek">Pasanek</a>]. Yet, the metaphors themselves are tagged to enable intersectional searches. A
               user can sort by not only literary period, metaphor category, and genre but also
               gender, race, and nationality. Among the latter, "African or
                  Afro-British" is one such category, which when selected with
                  "female" produces a list of metaphors by Phillis Wheatley.
               Despite the predictable underrepresentation of black women in a database of 18<span class="hi superscript">th</span> century British writing, the ability to navigate the
               database in such a way acknowledges the importance of intersectionality. The <cite class="title italic">Emory Women Writers Resource Project</cite> (EWWRP) similarly
               foregrounds an intersectional approach through the way it structures project data.
               Among the collections through which the site is organized are "Native American,""Abolition, Freedom, and Rights," and "Women’s Advocacy," but the collections are fluid, with texts fitting
               multiple categories appearing in more than one collection [<a class="ref" href="#ewwrp">EWWRP</a>].
                  <cite class="title italic">A Celebration of Women Writers</cite>, a site that preserves
               public domain women’s texts compiled by Mary Mark Ockerbloom, also enables ethnicity
               as one method of browsing the archive [<a class="ref" href="#ockerbloom2012">Ockerbloom 2012</a>].</div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p23">23</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p23">User integration is another way digital humanities projects can make intersectional
               interventions possible. <cite class="title italic">NINES: Nineteenth-century Scholarship
                  Online</cite> material is beginning to grow more diverse. Visible tags on the
               project website, including "women,""Chinese,""African," and "diaspora," suggest an effort to foreground a range of
               objects from 125 federated websites. The Collex interface offers possibilities for
               creating exhibits, which allows users to interact with the material through curation;
               even users without specialized training could arrange the material to explore a range
               of topics through available objects. Moreover, Collex offers the possibility of
               expanding the archive of affiliated websites via RDF, allowing creators of
               substantial projects to seek peer review and inclusion in NINES. NINES demonstrates
               openness towards greater representation and offers tools to make that possible.
                  <cite class="title italic">The Women Writers Project</cite>, which undertakes
               electronic text encoding for pre-Victorian women’s writing, includes a publication
               series called <cite class="title italic">Women Writers in Context,</cite> which features
               exhibits "designed to engage readers in the exploration and
                  discovery of topics related to early modern women’s writing" [<a class="ref" href="#wwp">WWP</a>]. One such exhibit on women and race allowed creator Kim Hall to
               explore the role of intersectional analysis and engagement with <cite class="title italic">The Women Writers Project</cite>. Accordingly, she notes, "Rather than isolating race as a focus, the best research sees race in relation to
                  concerns of gender, class, religion, and sexuality. To say that race is connected
                  to these other social divisions is not to say that race is analogous to these
                  other categories, nor is it to say that all marginalized people are oppressed or
                  made marginal in the same ways" [<a class="ref" href="#hall1999">Hall 1999</a>]. Though the scope of <cite class="title italic">The Women Writers
                  Project,</cite> namely the periods of literary history it examines, privileges
               the writing of white women, the <cite class="title italic">Women Writers in Context</cite>
               series signifies how scholars might find interpretive paths through the material.
               Through user engagement, these projects make intersectional analysis more legible in
               the archive.</div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p24">24</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p24">Beyond projects that address intersectionality indirectly, we can look to the
               examples of those that foreground it in project design. An example of an
               intersectional digital archive, Amy Earhart’s project <cite class="title italic">The 19<span class="hi superscript">th</span> Century Concord Digital Archive</cite> examines the
               relationship between Concord, Massachusetts and American literature and history. The
               archive "invites the scholar to utilize a broad set of digital
                  documents to reconsider how the town and its writers are situated within broader
                  scholarly conversations" [<a class="ref" href="#cda">CDA</a>]. Addressing scope, the project statement notes, "These [Concord] authors interacted with groups less frequently
                  recorded in textual documents of the time period: free African-Americans, Irish
                  immigrants, the poor, and criminal class" [<a class="ref" href="#cda">CDA</a>]. The archive offers insight on these engagements across lines of
               gender, nationality, class, and more: "By digitizing a broad
                  range of materials that represent the diverse people associated with literary
                  production the archive allows scholars to rethink the way we conceptualize
                  individual work associated with Concord, to redefine our assumptions about
                  literary and historical representation, and to reconsider the very foundation of
                  our disciplinary studies" [<a class="ref" href="#cda">CDA</a>]. The archive reflects Earhart’s observation that "scholars invested in early work on race in digital humanities
                  insisted on building editions and digital texts as activist intervention in the
                  closed canon" [<a class="ref" href="#earhart2013">Earhart 2013</a>]. Indeed, Earhart’s own project is an example of what
               intersectional activism in the canon looks like. </div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p25">25</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p25">A further dimension to consider is how intersectional analysis can be engaged through
               text mining. In their work on the Black Drama database, Shlomo Argamon, Charles
               Cooney, Russell Horton, Mark Olsen, Sterling Stein, and Robert Voyer made space for
               intersectional structures within the database as they considered "the degree to which machine learning can isolate stylistic or content
                  characteristics of authors and/or characters having particular attributes –
                  gender, race, and nationality" [<a class="ref" href="#argamon2009">Argamon 2009</a>]. The database contains 963 texts written by 128 men and
               243 by fifty-three women; 831 titles are by US authors while 375 are by authors from
               Caribbean or African countries. There are further variations in the number of
               speeches by women and male characters and black and white characters, with a small
               number of speeches by characters of other ethnic backgrounds. Metadata for the
               project contains 30 fields to describe characters and authors from the black stage,
               including "Race, age, gender, nationality, ethnicity, occupation, sexual
                     orientation, performers, if a real person and type" [<a class="ref" href="#argamon2009">Argamon 2009</a>]. They use the ARTFL search system PhiloLogic, which "allows joining of object attribute searches, forming a matrix
                     of author/title/character searching" [<a class="ref" href="#argamon2009">Argamon 2009</a>]. Argamon et al. demonstrate the range of intersectional analysis made possible
               by choice of platform, noting that "one can search for words in speeches by female, black
                     American characters depicted by male, non-American authors in comedies first
                     published during the first half of the 20<span class="hi superscript">th</span>
                     century" [<a class="ref" href="#argamon2009">Argamon 2009</a>]. Argamon et al.’s work suggests how data mining can provide new understandings
               of language use and its relationship to representation. For example, they note that
               analysis of racial epithets reveals variations of language use based on gender and
               nation and propose that such test cases "hint at larger
                  discursive and representation issues" [<a class="ref" href="#argamon2009">Argamon 2009</a>]. As Argamon et al.’s work with the Black Drama database
               begins looking at how to represent attributes like gender, race or nation as textual
               characteristics through computation, we might ask, "Can the
                  database be intersectional?"</div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p26">26</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p26">Conversation within the 2014 Critical Code Studies Working Group indicates the
               importance of intersectionality to our understanding of code as well. The CCSWG 2014
               featured a week on "Feminist Programming," led by Arielle
               Schlesinger and featuring Jacqueline Wernimont and Ben Wiedermann as discussants.
               Schlesinger began by asking the group, "What is feminist code?
                  What is feminist coding?" in relation to code snippets by Mez Breeze and
               micha cárdenas. Among the conversations generated were the relationship between
               executable code and cárdenas’s work code poems, an issue raised by Mark Marino.
               cárdenas explained, "I am more committed to the visionary and
                  speculative possibilities of these code snippets than their literal executable
                  possibilities"[<a class="ref" href="#lasmana2014">Lasmana 2014</a>]. Wernimont raised the issue of absence, evoking a
               generative possibility in "allowing the absent-presence of feminist executable code to
                     operate as an irritant" [<a class="ref" href="#lasmana2014">Lasmana 2014</a>]. She described this in feminist terms as "an occasion to
                  continue to question the structures that have not permitted such a thing to
                  exist" [<a class="ref" href="#lasmana2014">Lasmana 2014</a>]. cárdenas further complicated the notion of
                  "feminist" by noting that "feminist without
                  qualification can easily be equated to white, cis-gender, first world
                  feminism," asking "What is gained and lost by the
                  formulation of this code as feminist, as opposed to say, decolonial, in the sense
                  of rejecting western systems of epistemology" and raising the question of
               the role of intersectionality in code [<a class="ref" href="#lasmana2014">Lasmana 2014</a>]. Viola Lasmana
               responded by invoking Trinh T. Minh-ha: "Shake syntax, smash the
                  myths, and if you lose, unearth some new linguistic paths" (qtd. in [<a class="ref" href="#lasmana2014">Lasmana 2014</a>]. She suggests that such processes occur in the code poems
               written by cárdenas and Breeze. The question of executable code raises the issue of
               whether executability may be a limit to both intersectional praxis and digital
               humanities methodology. Given the reliance of digital humanities methodologies on
               executable code, is engaged intersectional work limited by it? By examining this
               question, we may consider the limits of code as not only sets of operations but also
               a language that may enable or foreclose intersectional conversations. </div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p27">27</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p27">Finally, practicing digital humanities through social media, Jessica M. Johnson’s
                  <cite class="title italic">The Codex,</cite> is an example of intersectional engagement
               in digital humanities. <cite class="title italic">The Codex</cite> is "a social media triptych" composed of three sites: <cite class="title italic">African Diaspora, PhD</cite>, <cite class="title italic">Diaspora Hypertext</cite>,
               and <cite class="title italic">Seeing Dark Matter</cite>[<a class="ref" href="#johnson2015">Johnson 2015</a>]. Guiding the development of these sites is Johnson’s
               intersectional praxis, which by her own description, is "anti-oppression, feminist and social justice oriented" [<a class="ref" href="#johnson2015">Johnson 2015</a>]. <cite class="title italic">African Diaspora, PhD</cite>
               showcases developments in African diaspora history, from an intersectional lens. A
               survey of recent posts shows attention to scholarship on a range of subjects like
               images of "faithful slaves" in Confederate discourse, including
               mammies and kinship, and race and gender in Atlantic New Orleans. Johnson’s site is
               an important resource for African diaspora scholarship, which she frames in
               intersectional terms: "The field is also interdisciplinary,
                  supporting and supported by research emerging from the fields of African,
                  Africana/African-American, and Latin American studies; women, gender, and
                  sexuality studies; and feminist, post-colonial, and race theory" [<a class="ref" href="#johnson2015">Johnson 2015</a>]. <cite class="title italic">Diaspora Hypertext</cite>
               showcases Johnson’s work as a "black feminist/radical woman of
                  color digital humanist and media maker" [<a class="ref" href="#johnson2015">Johnson 2015</a>]. Organized into "writing,""research," and "teaching" tracks, the site provides a range of resources
               on African Atlantic Diaspora history. Complementing these sites is <cite class="title italic">Seeing Dark Matter</cite>, a Tumblr-driven digital archive devoted
               to black diasporic visual culture and to "processing Atlantic
                  slavery through application, code, and screen" [<a class="ref" href="#johnson2015">Johnson 2015</a>]. In its multiple modes, Johnson’s work demonstrates how
               engaging a range of tools enables more full exploration of intersectionality within
               an interdisciplinary field. </div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p28">28</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p28">The theoretical approaches and projects I have described here are intentionally
               diverse in subject, providing a survey of intersectional traces in the digital
               humanities. Some projects, like Earhart’s, Argamon et al.’s and Johnson’s work,
               consciously integrate intersectionality into their design. Others, like <cite class="title italic">Orlando</cite>, <cite class="title italic">CBW,</cite> and <cite class="title italic">NINES</cite>, suggest how intersectional engagement possible, even
               if not a primary goal. This cursory look for hints of intersectionality is intended
               as an opening salvo for new histories of the digital humanities that locate
               intersectionality at their center and intervene at the locus of theory and method.
               What I have offered here is the work of survey, a pre-cursor to the deep analysis
               necessary for further developing an intersectional history of digital humanities.
               Yet, I have only examined the relatively painless ways that intersectional
               perspectives can be integrated into scholarship: acknowledging the inclusions or
               exclusions of data, defining terms in inclusive ways, or adding another tag. This is
               the surface-level work of representation that is unlikely to destabilize the moorings
               of digital humanities. The pursuit of a more inclusive field only will begin by
               looking at these practices as ways of being thoughtful, intentional, and
               intersectional about digital humanities. Yet, painful work must be done too. This
               includes looking more closely at digital humanities projects, opening the black boxes
               to examine the imprints of intersectionality on archive, code, metadata, database,
               and more. In the writing and rewriting of these histories, digital humanities
               practitioners must situate them in the histories of Afrofuturism, digital textual
               recovery, new media studies, and science and technology studies, being careful not to
               erase or write over the contributions that scholars of race, class, gender,
               sexuality, disability, or other forms of difference are making to the digital
               humanities – or risk reaffirming the power of Western academic hegemony. Moreover, we
               must develop intersectional practices for the digital humanities that account for
               difference from the ground up, integrating theory and method. At the juncture of the
               two, we must attend to discourses and histories of race and racialization,
               complexities of gender, complications of class, the operations of sexuality, and
               their intersections. In doing so, we can create projects that engage, rather than
               rebuff, difference. </div>
               </div>
               <div class="div div0">
                  <h1 class="head">Conclusion</h1>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p29">29</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p29">The affordances of the digital humanities are often thought to reside in its ethos of
               building and hacking, in the pursuit of knowledge that emerge from the act of making.
               As this survey of theoretical and project-based traces of intersectionality within
               digital humanities proposes, cultural critique is perhaps misunderstood by its
               detractors in the field as an attempt to force a theoretical rubric onto digital
               humanities or to rehearse a "hack" vs. "yack" binary. Rather, theoretical
               moves are implicit within digital humanities projects and excavating them is
               necessary to ensuring intellectual diversity. We have the opportunity to build a more
               inclusive field, new methodologies, and new forms of analysis. </div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p30">30</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p30">Why an intersectional approach? As Kathy Davis suggests, intersectionality is not a
                  "normative straitjacket" or predetermined method of
               feminist analysis [<a class="ref" href="#davis2008">Davis 2008</a>, 79]. Drawing on Patricia Hill
               Collins’s observation that intersectionality is often taken as pre-defined and
               ignores convergence and contradiction within intersectional scholarship, Anna
               Carastathis argues that intersectionality must be viewed as a provisional concept
               that "anticipates, rather than arrives at, the normative or
                  theoretical goals often imputed to it" [<a class="ref" href="#carastathis2014">Carastathis 2014</a>, 60]. The axes of difference within
               intersectionality are dynamic and do not operate in predictable ways; rather, they
               are fluid and constructed, the power valances in each in flux. Intersectionality is
               not a prescriptive method because there isn’t one particular way of "doing"
               intersectionality. Rather, intersectional digital humanities asks us to begin with
               the specificities of a data set, identify the layers of difference that intersect
               within it, and use that knowledge as a basis for project design. </div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p31">31</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p31">The fluidity of intersectionality is a natural fit for the flexibility that digital
               humanities connotes. In its recent popularity, Patrik Svensson suggests, digital
               humanities has seen "a higher degree of heterogeneity and
                  inclusion of other epistemic traditions" [<a class="ref" href="#svensson2009">Svensson 2009</a>]. He positions such growth in broad ways, suggesting we
               might view information technology as "a tool, an object of study,
                  an exploratory laboratory, an expressive medium, and an activist venue" [<a class="ref" href="#svensson2010">Svensson 2010</a>]. Svensson proposes that a "big-tent
                  digital humanities" would encompass this proliferation of modes
               [<a class="ref" href="#svensson2013">Svensson 2013</a>]. As an alternative to the tent, however, Svensson
               proposes a model of digital humanities that is a "meeting place,
                  innovation hub, and trading zone" to emphasize "commitment to interdisciplinary work and deep
                     collaboration" [<a class="ref" href="#svensson2013">Svensson 2013</a>]. The affordance of such a model is a "fractioned (not homogeneous) collaborative (not coerced)
                     trading zone and a meeting space that supports deeply collaborative work,
                     individual expression, unexpected connections, and synergetic power" [<a class="ref" href="#svensson2013">Svensson 2013</a>]. To appreciate such benefits, Svensson argues, the digital humanities "needs to support and allow multiple modes of engagement between the
                  humanities and the digital...[to] maximize points of interaction, tackle large
                  research and methodology challenges, and facilitate deep integration between
                  thinking and making" [<a class="ref" href="#svensson2013">Svensson 2013</a>]. These are the spaces where complex negotiations
               between theory and method are made possible. They require "difficult
                  thinking," which Mark Sample defines as "imagining the world from multiple perspectives and wrestling
                     with conflicting evidence about the world" [<a class="ref" href="#sample2014">Sample 2014</a>]. As Sample proposes, difficult thinking does not seek easy reconcilement for
               conflicting ideas but "faces these ambiguities head-on and even
                  preserves them" [<a class="ref" href="#sample2014">Sample 2014</a>]. Intersectionality, in its emphasis on anti-essentialism
               and possibilities of accounting for competing axes of difference in multiple
               permutations, makes difficult thinking possible and perhaps even brings Svensson’s
               vision of digital humanities to fruition. </div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p32">32</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p32">Working at the intersections of digital humanities and intersectionality, we can
               intervene in the false dichotomy between digital humanities and cultural critique.
               For, as Bianco reminds, "We are not required to choose between
                  the philosophical, critical, cultural, and computational; we <em class="emph">are</em>
                  required to integrate and to experiment" [<a class="ref" href="#bianco2013">Bianco 2013</a>]. Existing digital humanities projects provide examples of
               how, in small and large ways, theory and method can be combined to address recurring
               questions of the role of race, class, gender, ability, sexuality, nationality, and
               other categories of difference within the field. These phenomena subtend the
               development and production of digital humanities projects but they may not be
               evident. Therefore, it is incumbent on us, as digital humanities practitioners, to
               make them legible, to move them beyond the margins. To suggest we embrace
               intersectionality as a critical approach for the digital humanities is not to impose
               a static, single model of analysis. Rather, it opens space to engage with the variety
               of ways difference informs our work. There is no single way of being
                  "intersectional" – instead, intersectionality privileges
               exploration and innovation in feminist praxis. And aren’t exploration and innovation
               at the very heart of digital humanities?</div>
               </div>
               <div class="div div0">
                  <h1 class="head">Acknowledgments</h1>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p33">33</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p33">I gratefully acknowledge the advice of Jacqueline Wernimont and three anonymous
                  <cite class="title italic">DHQ</cite> reviewers whose extensive, generous comments were
               indispensable to this article. I am also grateful for the valuable feedback on parts
               of this article presented at the Harriet Tubman Institute at York University and the
               Kelly Writers House at the University of Pennsylvania. </div>
               </div>
            </div>
            <div id="worksCited">
               <h2>Works Cited</h2>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="argamon2009"><!-- close -->Argamon 2009</span>  Argamon, S., Cooney, C., Horton, R.,
               Olsen, M., Stein, S., Voyer, R. "Gender, Race, and Nationality in
                  Black Drama, 1950-2006: Mining Differences in Language Use in Authors and Their
                  Characters,"<cite class="title italic">Digital Humanities Quarterly</cite> 3.2 (2009).</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="aslinger2013"><!-- close -->Aslinger 2013</span>  Aslinger, B. and Huntemann, N. "Digital Media Studies Futures,"<cite class="title italic">Media Culture, &amp; Society</cite> 35.1 (2013): 9-12.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="bailey2011"><!-- close -->Bailey 2011</span>  Bailey, M. "All the
                  Digital Humanists Are White, All the Nerds Are Men, But Some of Us Are
                  Brave,"<cite class="title italic">Journal of Digital Humanities</cite> 1.1 (2011). </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="bauer2011"><!-- close -->Bauer 2011</span> Bauer, J. "Who You
                  Calling Untheoretical,"<cite class="title italic">Journal of Digital Humanities</cite> 1.1 (2011). </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="bianco2013"><!-- close -->Bianco 2013</span>  Bianco, J.S. "This
                  Digital Humanities Which Is Not One." In M. K. Gold (ed), <cite class="title italic">Debates in the Digital Humanities,</cite> University of Minnesota
               Press, Minneapolis (2013).</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="cbw"><!-- close -->CBW</span>  Collective Biographies of Women. "About."<a class="ref"
                     href="http://womensbios.lib.virginia.edu/about"
                     onclick="window.open('http://womensbios.lib.virginia.edu/about'); return false">http://womensbios.lib.virginia.edu/about</a>.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="cda"><!-- close -->CDA</span>  The 19<span class="hi superscript">th</span>-Century Concord
               Digital Archive. "Project Overview."<a class="ref"
                     href="http://digitalconcord.tamu.edu/content/project-overview"
                     onclick="window.open('http://digitalconcord.tamu.edu/content/project-overview'); return false">http://digitalconcord.tamu.edu/content/project-overview</a>.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="carastathis2014"><!-- close -->Carastathis 2014</span>  Carastathis, A. "Reinvigorating Intersectionality as Provisional Concept." In
               N. Goswami, M. M. O’Donovan, and L. Yount (eds), <cite class="title italic">Why Race and
                  Gender Still Matter: An Intersectional Approach,</cite> Pickering &amp; Chatto
               Publishers, London (2014), pp. 59-70.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="cecire2011"><!-- close -->Cecire 2011</span> Cecire, Natalia. "When
                  Digital Humanities Was in Vogue,"<cite class="title italic">Journal of Digital Humanities</cite> 1.1 (2011)</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="christian1987"><!-- close -->Christian 1987</span>  Christian, B. "The Race for Theory,"<cite class="title italic">Cultural Critique</cite> 6 (1987): 51-63.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="chun2001"><!-- close -->Chun 2001</span>  Chun, W. "Scenes of
                  Empowerment: Virtual Racial Diversity and Digital Divides,"<cite class="title italic">New Formations</cite> 45 (2001): 169-188.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="chun2005"><!-- close -->Chun 2005</span> Chun, W. <cite class="title italic">Control and
                  Freedom: Power and Paranoia in the Age of Fiber Optics</cite>, MIT Press,
               Cambridge, MA (2005).</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="conghuyen2013"><!-- close -->Cong-Huyen 2013</span>  Cong-Huyen, A. "Thinking Through Race (Gender, Class, &amp; Nation) in the Digital
                  Humanities: The #transformDH Example."<a class="ref"
                     href="https://prezi.com/ysz-t5mc7hyu/thinking-of-race-gender-class-nation-in-dh/"
                     onclick="window.open('https://prezi.com/ysz-t5mc7hyu/thinking-of-race-gender-class-nation-in-dh/'); return false">https://prezi.com/ysz-t5mc7hyu/thinking-of-race-gender-class-nation-in-dh/</a>.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="crenshaw1991"><!-- close -->Crenshaw 1991</span>  Crenshaw, K. "Mapping the Margins: Intersectionality, Identity Politics, and Violence Against
                  Women of Color,"<cite class="title italic">Stanford Law Review</cite> 43 (1991): 1241-1299. </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="crenshaw2014"><!-- close -->Crenshaw 2014</span>  Crenshaw, K. "Justice Rising: Moving Intersectionally in the Age of Post-Everything."
               London School of Economics. <a class="ref"
                     href="http://www.lse.ac.uk/newsAndMedia/videoAndAudio/channels/publicLecturesAndEvents/player.aspx?id=2360"
                     onclick="window.open('http://www.lse.ac.uk/newsAndMedia/videoAndAudio/channels/publicLecturesAndEvents/player.aspx?id=2360'); return false">http://www.lse.ac.uk/newsAndMedia/videoAndAudio/channels/publicLecturesAndEvents/player.aspx?id=2360</a>.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="davis2008"><!-- close -->Davis 2008</span>  Davis, K. "Intersectionality as Buzzword,"<cite class="title italic">Feminist Theory</cite> 9.1 (2008): 67-85.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="digitaldiversity2015"><!-- close -->Digital Diversity 2015</span>  Digital Diversity
               2015. "CFP."<a class="ref"
                     href="http://digitaldiversity2015.org/cfp/"
                     onclick="window.open('http://digitaldiversity2015.org/cfp/'); return false">http://digitaldiversity2015.org/cfp/</a>. </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="ewwrp"><!-- close -->EWWRP</span>  Emory Women Writers Resource Project. "About."<a class="ref"
                     href="http://womenwriters.library.emory.edu/about.php"
                     onclick="window.open('http://womenwriters.library.emory.edu/about.php'); return false">http://womenwriters.library.emory.edu/about.php</a>.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="earhart2013"><!-- close -->Earhart 2013</span>  Earhart, A. "Can
                  Information Be Unfettered? Race and the New Digital Humanities Canon." In
               M. K. Gold (ed), <cite class="title italic">Debates in the Digital Humanities</cite>,
               University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis (2013).</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="ettarh2013"><!-- close -->Ettarh 2013</span>  Ettarh, F. M. "Black
                  OR Queer? Life at the Intersection." Hack Library School. <a class="ref"
                     href="https://hacklibschool.wordpress.com/2013/11/19/black-or-queer-life-at-the-intersection/#more-8032"
                     onclick="window.open('https://hacklibschool.wordpress.com/2013/11/19/black-or-queer-life-at-the-intersection/#more-8032'); return false">https://hacklibschool.wordpress.com/2013/11/19/black-or-queer-life-at-the-intersection/#more-8032</a>.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="everett2002"><!-- close -->Everett 2002</span>  Everett, A. "The
                  Revolution Will Be Digitized: Afrocentricity and the Digital Public
                  Sphere,"<cite class="title italic">Social Text</cite> 20.2 (2002): 125-146.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="everett2009"><!-- close -->Everett 2009</span>  Everett, A. <cite class="title italic">Digital Diaspora: A Race for Cyberspace.</cite> SUNY Press, Albany (2009). </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="everett2014"><!-- close -->Everett 2014</span>  Everett, A. Champlin, A. and
               Vanderhoef, J. "Race, Space, and Digital Games: An Interview with
                  Anna Everett."<cite class="title italic">Media Fields Journal</cite> 8 (2014). </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="gajjala2008"><!-- close -->Gajjala 2008</span> Gajjala, R., Blair, K. and Tulley, C.
               (eds.). <cite class="title italic">Webbing Cyberfeminist Practice: Communities, Pedagogies,
                  and Social Action.</cite> Hampton Press, New York (2008). </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="gajjala2012"><!-- close -->Gajjala 2012</span> Gajjala, R. <cite class="title italic">Cyberculture and the Subaltern</cite>. Lexington Books, Lanham, MD
               (2012).</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="gold2013"><!-- close -->Gold 2013</span>  Gold, M. K. "The Digital
                  Humanities Moment." In M. K. Gold (ed), <cite class="title italic">Debates in the
                  Digital Humanities</cite>, University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis
               (2013).</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="hall1999"><!-- close -->Hall 1999</span>  Hall, K. "Women and
                  Race." The Women Writers Project. <a class="ref"
                     href="http://www.wwp.northeastern.edu/context/#rEss.race.xml"
                     onclick="window.open('http://www.wwp.northeastern.edu/context/#rEss.race.xml'); return false">http://www.wwp.northeastern.edu/context/#rEss.race.xml</a>.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="harding1998"><!-- close -->Harding 1998</span> Harding, S. <cite class="title italic">Is
                  Science Multicultural?: Postcolonialisms, Feminisms, and Epistemologies</cite>.
               Indiana University Press, Bloomington, IN (1998).</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="harding2008"><!-- close -->Harding 2008</span> Harding, S. <cite class="title italic">Science
                  from Below: Feminisms, Postcolonialisms, and Modernities</cite>. Duke University
               Press, Durham, NC (2008).</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="johnson2015"><!-- close -->Johnson 2015</span>  Johnson, J. M. Diaspora Hypertext, the
               Blog. <a class="ref"
                     href="http://diasporahypertext.com/"
                     onclick="window.open('http://diasporahypertext.com/'); return false">http://diasporahypertext.com/</a>.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="jones2013"><!-- close -->Jones 2013</span> Jones, S. <cite class="title italic">The Emergence
                  of the Digital Humanities</cite>. Routledge, New York (2013).</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="keeling2014"><!-- close -->Keeling 2014</span>  Keeling, K. "Queer
                  OS,"<cite class="title italic">Cinema Journal</cite> 53.2 (2014): 152-7.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="kimball1990"><!-- close -->Kimball 1990</span>  Kimball, R. <cite class="title italic">Tenured Radicals: How Politics Has Corrupted our Higher Education</cite>. Ivan
               R. Dee, Chicago (1990).</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="kirsch2014"><!-- close -->Kirsch 2014</span>  Kirsch, A. "Technology is Taking Over English Departments: The False Promise of the Digital
                  Humanities,"<cite class="title italic">The New Republic</cite>, 2 May 2014. <a class="ref"
                     href="http://www.newrepublic.com/article/117428/limits-digital-humanities-adam-kirsch"
                     onclick="window.open('http://www.newrepublic.com/article/117428/limits-digital-humanities-adam-kirsch'); return false">http://www.newrepublic.com/article/117428/limits-digital-humanities-adam-kirsch</a>.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="kirschenbaum2014"><!-- close -->Kirschenbaum 2014</span> Kirschenbaum, M. "What is 'Digital Humanities,' and Why Are They
                  Saying Such Terrible Things About It?"<cite class="title italic">differences</cite> 25.1 (2014): 46-63.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="lasmana2014"><!-- close -->Lasmana 2014</span>  Lasmana, V. "Critical Code Studies Working Group 2014: Week 2 Highlights." Critical
               Code Studies Working Group 2014. <a class="ref"
                     href="http://haccslab.com/?p=85"
                     onclick="window.open('http://haccslab.com/?p=85'); return false">http://haccslab.com/?p=85</a>.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="liu2013"><!-- close -->Liu 2013</span>  Liu, A. "Where Is Cultural
                  Criticism in the Digital Humanities?" In M. K. Gold (ed), <cite class="title italic">Debates in the Digital Humanities</cite>, University of Minnesota
               Press, Minneapolis (2013).</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="lothian2013"><!-- close -->Lothian 2013</span>  Lothian, A. and Phillips, A. "Can Digital Humanities Mean Transformative Critique?"<cite class="title italic">e-Media Studies</cite> 3.1 (2013). </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="mcintosh1990"><!-- close -->McIntosh 1990</span>  McIntosh, P. "White Privilege: Unpacking the Invisible Knapsack,"<cite class="title italic">Independent School</cite> (1990): 31-36. </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="mcpherson2013"><!-- close -->McPherson 2013</span>  McPherson, T. "Why Are the Digital Humanities So White? or Thinking the Histories of Race and
                  Computation." In M. K. Gold (ed), <cite class="title italic">Debates in the
                  Digital Humanities</cite>, University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis
               (2013).</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="nines"><!-- close -->NINES</span>  NINES: Nineteenth-century Scholarship Online. "Collex."<a class="ref"
                     href="http://www.nines.org/about/software/collex/"
                     onclick="window.open('http://www.nines.org/about/software/collex/'); return false">http://www.nines.org/about/software/collex/</a>.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="nakamura2002"><!-- close -->Nakamura 2002</span>  Nakamura, L. <cite class="title italic">Cybertypes: Race, Ethnicity, and Identity on the Internet</cite>. Routledge, New
               York (2002). </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="nakamura2007"><!-- close -->Nakamura 2007</span>  Nakamura, L. <cite class="title italic">Digitizing Race: Visual Cultures of the Internet</cite>. University of Minnesota
               Press, Minneapolis (2007). </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="nakamura2012"><!-- close -->Nakamura 2012</span> Nakamura, L and Chow-White, P. (eds).
                  <cite class="title italic">Race After the Internet.</cite> Routledge, New York
               (2012).</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="nayar2010"><!-- close -->Nayar 2010</span>  Nayar, P. <cite class="title italic">An
                  Introduction to New Media and Cybercultures</cite>. John C. Wiley and Sons,
               Malden, MA (2010).</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="nelson2001"><!-- close -->Nelson 2001</span>  Nelson, A. and Tu, T. L. N. <cite class="title italic">Technicolor: Race, Technology, and Everday Life</cite>. NYU Press,
               New York (2001). </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="nowviskie2012"><!-- close -->Nowviskie 2012</span>  Nowviskie, B. "Don’t Circle the Wagons." Bethany Nowviskie. <a class="ref"
                     href="http://nowviskie.org/2012/dont-circle-the-wagons/"
                     onclick="window.open('http://nowviskie.org/2012/dont-circle-the-wagons/'); return false">http://nowviskie.org/2012/dont-circle-the-wagons/</a>.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="nowviskie2013"><!-- close -->Nowviskie 2013</span>  Nowviskie, B. "Eternal September of the Digital Humanities." In M. K. Gold (ed), <cite class="title italic">Debates in the Digital Humanities</cite>, University of Minnesota
               Press, Minneapolis (2013).</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="nowviskie2014"><!-- close -->Nowviskie 2014</span> Nowviskie, B. "On the Origins of 'Hack' and
                  'Yack,'"<cite class="title italic">Journal of Digital Humanities</cite> 3.2 (2014).</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="ockerbloom2012"><!-- close -->Ockerbloom 2012</span>  Ockerbloom, M. M. A Celebration
               of Women Writers. <a class="ref"
                     href="http://digital.library.upenn.edu/women/"
                     onclick="window.open('http://digital.library.upenn.edu/women/'); return false">http://digital.library.upenn.edu/women/</a>.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="orlando"><!-- close -->Orlando</span>  The Orlando Project. "Literary History–With a Difference."<a class="ref"
                     href="http://orlando.cambridge.org/public/svDocumentation?formname=t&amp;d_id=LITERARYHISTORYWITHADIFFERENCE"
                     onclick="window.open('http://orlando.cambridge.org/public/svDocumentation?formname=t&amp;d_id=LITERARYHISTORYWITHADIFFERENCE'); return false">http://orlando.cambridge.org/public/svDocumentation?formname=t&amp;d_id=LITERARYHISTORYWITHADIFFERENCE</a>.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="pannapacker2009"><!-- close -->Pannapacker 2009</span>  Pannapacker, W. "The MLA and the Digital Humanities,"<cite class="title italic">The Chronicle of Higher Education</cite>, 28 December 2009.
                  <a class="ref"
                     href="http://chronicle.com/blogPost/The-MLAthe-Digital/19468/"
                     onclick="window.open('http://chronicle.com/blogPost/The-MLAthe-Digital/19468/'); return false">http://chronicle.com/blogPost/The-MLAthe-Digital/19468/</a>.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="pasanek"><!-- close -->Pasanek</span>  Pasanek, B. "About."
               The Mind Is a Metaphor. <a class="ref"
                     href="http://metaphors.iath.virginia.edu/about"
                     onclick="window.open('http://metaphors.iath.virginia.edu/about'); return false">http://metaphors.iath.virginia.edu/about</a>.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="posner2012"><!-- close -->Posner 2012</span>  Posner, M. K. "Some
                  Things to Think About Before You Exhort Everyone to Code." Miriam Posner’s
               Blog. <a class="ref"
                     href="http://miriamposner.com/blog/some-things-to-think-about-before-you-exhort-everyone-to-code/"
                     onclick="window.open('http://miriamposner.com/blog/some-things-to-think-about-before-you-exhort-everyone-to-code/'); return false">http://miriamposner.com/blog/some-things-to-think-about-before-you-exhort-everyone-to-code/</a>.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="potter2013"><!-- close -->Potter 2010</span>  Potter, C. B. "Thou
                  Shalt Commit: The Internet, New Media, and the Future of Women’s History,"<cite class="title italic">Journal of Women’s History</cite> 25.4 (2013): 350-362.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="ramsay2011"><!-- close -->Ramsay 2011</span> Ramsay, S. "Who’s In
                  and Who’s Out." Stephen Ramsay. <a class="ref"
                     href="http://stephenramsay.us/text/2011/01/08/whos-in-and-whos-out/"
                     onclick="window.open('http://stephenramsay.us/text/2011/01/08/whos-in-and-whos-out/'); return false">http://stephenramsay.us/text/2011/01/08/whos-in-and-whos-out/</a>.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="rigoni2012"><!-- close -->Rigoni 2012</span>  Rigoni, I. "Intersectionality and Mediated Cultural Production in a Globalized Post-Colonial
                  World,"<cite class="title italic">Ethnic and Racial Studies</cite> 35.5 (2012): p.
               834-849.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="risam2013"><!-- close -->Risam 2013</span>  Risam, R. and Koh, A. Postcolonial Digital
               Humanities. <a class="ref"
                     href="http://dhpoco.org"
                     onclick="window.open('http://dhpoco.org'); return false">http://dhpoco.org</a>.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="rockwell2011"><!-- close -->Rockwell 2011</span>  Rockwell, G. "Inclusion in the Digital Humanities." philosophi.ca. <a class="ref"
                     href="http://www.philosophi.ca/pmwiki.php/Main/InclusionInTheDigitalHumanities"
                     onclick="window.open('http://www.philosophi.ca/pmwiki.php/Main/InclusionInTheDigitalHumanities'); return false">http://www.philosophi.ca/pmwiki.php/Main/InclusionInTheDigitalHumanities</a>.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="saklofske2014"><!-- close -->Saklofske 2014</span>  Saklofske, J., Levesque, S., Bath,
               J., Brown, S., Clement, T., Posner, M., Porter, D., Sinatra, M., and Sinclair, S.
                  "Joint ACH and Canadian DH Conference 2015." The
               Association for Computers and the Humanities. <a class="ref"
                     href="http://ach.org/2014/10/20/joint-ach-canadian-dh-conference-2015/"
                     onclick="window.open('http://ach.org/2014/10/20/joint-ach-canadian-dh-conference-2015/'); return false">http://ach.org/2014/10/20/joint-ach-canadian-dh-conference-2015/</a>.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="sample2014"><!-- close -->Sample 2014</span>  Sample, M. "Difficult
                  Thinking About the Digital Humanities." Sample Reality. <a class="ref"
                     href="http://www.samplereality.com/2014/05/12/difficult-thinking-about-the-digital-humanities/"
                     onclick="window.open('http://www.samplereality.com/2014/05/12/difficult-thinking-about-the-digital-humanities/'); return false">http://www.samplereality.com/2014/05/12/difficult-thinking-about-the-digital-humanities/</a>
               </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="scheinfeldt2010a"><!-- close -->Scheinfeldt 2010a</span>  Scheinfeldt, T. "Where’s the Beef?" Found History. <a class="ref"
                     href="http://foundhistory.org/digital-humanities/wheres-the-beef-does-digital-humanities-have-to-answer-questions/"
                     onclick="window.open('http://foundhistory.org/digital-humanities/wheres-the-beef-does-digital-humanities-have-to-answer-questions/'); return false">http://foundhistory.org/digital-humanities/wheres-the-beef-does-digital-humanities-have-to-answer-questions/</a>.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="scheinfeldt2010b"><!-- close -->Scheinfeldt 2010b</span> Scheinfeldt, T. "Why Digital Humanities Is 'Nice.'" Found
               History. <a class="ref"
                     href="http://foundhistory.org/2010/05/why-digital-humanities-is-nice/"
                     onclick="window.open('http://foundhistory.org/2010/05/why-digital-humanities-is-nice/'); return false">http://foundhistory.org/2010/05/why-digital-humanities-is-nice/</a>.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="schmidt2011"><!-- close -->Schmidt 2011</span> Schmidt, B. "Theory
                  First,"<cite class="title italic">Journal of Digital Humanities</cite> 1.1 (2011). </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="smith2007"><!-- close -->Smith 2007</span>  Smith, M. N. "The Human
                  Touch Software of the Highest Order: Revisiting Editing as Interpretation,"<cite class="title italic">Textual Cultures</cite> 2.1 (2007): 1-15.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="smith2014"><!-- close -->Smith 2014</span>  Smith, M. N. "Frozen
                  Social Relations and Time for a Thaw: Visibility, Exclusions, and Considerations
                  for Postcolonial Digital Archives,"<cite class="title italic">Journal of Victorian Culture</cite> 19.3 (2014):
               403-410.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="spiro2013"><!-- close -->Spiro 2013</span>  Spiro, L. "This Is Why
                  We Fight: Defining the Values of the Digital Humanities." In M. K. Gold
               (ed), <cite class="title italic">Debates in the Digital Humanities</cite>, University of
               Minnesota Press, Minneapolis (2013).</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="svensson2009"><!-- close -->Svensson 2009</span>  Svensson, P. "Humanities Computing as Digital Humanities,"<cite class="title italic">Digital Humanities Quarterly</cite> 3.3 (2009). </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="svensson2010"><!-- close -->Svensson 2010</span>  Svensson, P. "The
                  Landscape of Digital Humanities,"<cite class="title italic">Digital Humanities Quarterly</cite> 4.1 (2010). </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="svensson2012"><!-- close -->Svensson 2012</span>  Svensson, P. "Envisioning the Digital Humanities,"<cite class="title italic">Digital Humanities Quarterly</cite> 6.1 (2012). </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="svensson2013"><!-- close -->Svensson 2013</span>  Svensson, P. "Beyond the Big Tent." In M. K. Gold (ed), <cite class="title italic">Debates in
                  the Digital Humanities</cite>, University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis
               (2013).</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="tal1996"><!-- close -->Tal 1996</span>  Tal, K. "Life Behind the
                  Screen,"<cite class="title italic">Wired</cite> 4.10 (1996): 134, 136.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="turkel2010"><!-- close -->Turkel 2010</span>  Turkel, W. J. and Elliott, D. "Making and Playing With Models: Using Rapid Prototyping to Explore
                  the History and Technology of Stage Magic." Playing With History. <a class="ref"
                     href="http://quod.lib.umich.edu/d/dh/12544152.0001.001/1:6/--pastplay-teaching-and-learning-history-with-technology?g=dculture;rgn=div1;view=fulltext;xc=1"
                     onclick="window.open('http://quod.lib.umich.edu/d/dh/12544152.0001.001/1:6/--pastplay-teaching-and-learning-history-with-technology?g=dculture;rgn=div1;view=fulltext;xc=1'); return false">http://quod.lib.umich.edu/d/dh/12544152.0001.001/1:6/--pastplay-teaching-and-learning-history-with-technology?g=dculture;rgn=div1;view=fulltext;xc=1</a>.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="wwp"><!-- close -->WWP</span>  The Women Writers Project. "Exhibits."<a class="ref"
                     href="http://www.wwp.northeastern.edu/research/publications/exhibits/"
                     onclick="window.open('http://www.wwp.northeastern.edu/research/publications/exhibits/'); return false">http://www.wwp.northeastern.edu/research/publications/exhibits/</a>.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="wernimont2013"><!-- close -->Wernimont 2013</span>  Wernimont, J. "Whence Feminism? Assessing Feminist Interventions in Digital Literary
                  Archives,"<cite class="title italic">Digital Humanities Quarterly</cite> 7.1 (2013).</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="transformdh2012"><!-- close -->transformDH 2012</span>  #transformDH. "About #transformDH."<a class="ref"
                     href="http://originaltransformdh.tumblr.com/about"
                     onclick="window.open('http://originaltransformdh.tumblr.com/about'); return false">http://originaltransformdh.tumblr.com/about</a>.</div>
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar">
               <a href="#">Preview</a>  |  <span style="color: grey">XML</span> |  <a href="#"
                  onclick="javascript:window.print();"
                  title="Click for print friendly version">Print Article</a>
            </div>
         </div>
      </div>
   </body>
</html>
