<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <title>[PREVIEW] DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly: </title>
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_screen.css"
            media="screen"
            type="text/css"
            rel="stylesheet"/>
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_print.css"
            media="print"
            type="text/css"
            rel="stylesheet"/>
      <style type="text/css">
        #mainContent {
          float: none;
          padding-top: 2em;
          padding-left: 4em;
          padding-right: 4em;
          margin-left: 225px;
           
        }</style>
      <script src="../../common/js/javascriptLibrary.js" type="text/javascript"/>
   </head>
   <body>
      <div id="mainContent">
         <div class="DHQarticle">
            <div id="pubInfo">Preview<br/>Volume 009 Number 1</div>
            <div class="toolbar">
               <form id="taporware" action="get">
                  <div>
                     <a href="/dhq/preview/index.html">Preview</a>
                     | 
                    <a rel="external" href="/dhq/vol/9/1/000207.xml">XML</a>

| 
		   Discuss
			(<a href="/dhq/vol/9/1/000207/000207.html#disqus_thread"
                        data-disqus-identifier="000207">
				Comments
			</a>)
                </div>
               </form>
            </div>
            <div class="DHQheader">
        
            
                
                <h1 class="articleTitle">Close Rereading: A review of Jessica Pressman, <cite class="title italic">Digital Modernism: Making It New in New Media</cite> (Oxford:
                    Oxford UP, 2014)</h1>
                <div class="author">
                  <span style="color: grey">Shawna Ross</span> &lt;<a href="mailto:smross3_at_asu_dot_edu"
                     onclick="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('smross3_at_asu_dot_edu'); return false;"
                     onkeypress="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('smross3_at_asu_dot_edu'); return false;">smross3_at_asu_dot_edu</a>&gt;, Arizona State University</div>
            
            

            
        
        
        
        
               <span xmlns=""
                     class="Z3988"
                     title="url_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;rft_val_fmt=info%3Aofi%2Ffmt%3Akev%3Amtx%3Ajournal&amp;rfr_id=info%3Asid%2Fzotero.org%3A2&amp;rft.genre=article&amp;rft.atitle=Close%20Rereading%3A%20A%20review%20of%20Jessica%20Pressman,%20Digital%20Modernism%3A%20Making%20It%20New%20in%20New%20Media%20(Oxford%3A%20Oxford%20UP,%202014)&amp;rft.jtitle=Digital%20Humanities%20Quarterly&amp;rft.stitle=DHQ&amp;rft.issn=1938-4122&amp;rft.date=&amp;rft.volume=009&amp;rft.issue=1&amp;rft.aulast=Ross&amp;rft.aufirst=Shawna&amp;rft.au=Shawna%20Ross"> </span>
            </div>

            <div id="DHQtext">
        
               <div id="abstract">
                  <h2>Abstract</h2>
                
                  <p>This review of Jessica Pressman’s <cite class="title italic">Digital Modernism: Making
                        It New in New Media</cite> (2014) emphasizes the field-building
                    significance of Pressman’s innovative approach to analyzing electronic
                    literature, an approach that reinvigorates the dated methods of New Criticism
                    for use in the digital humanities. Pressman identifies a genre of contemporary
                    electronic literature, "digital modernism," and
                    uncovers continuities linking it with early twentieth-century modernism. In
                    spite of an uneven style that oscillates between belabored scholasticism and
                    brilliant description, <cite class="title italic">Digital Modernism</cite> rigorously
                    wrangles a wide array of data points — historical, literary, and technological —
                    to create an account of contemporary electronic literature relevant for digital
                    humanists, literary scholars, and New Media scholars. This review contextualizes
                    the work within new currents in modernist scholarship, reflects on the modernism
                    and digital modernist "canon" Pressman assembles, and then
                    provides chapter summaries, with an emphasis on <cite class="title italic">Digital
                        Modernism</cite>’s reinvention of close reading for the twenty-first
                    century.</p>
               </div>
            
        
        
               <div class="counter">
                  <a href="#p1">1</a>
               </div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p1">Jessica Pressman’s <cite class="title italic">Digital Modernism: Making It New in New
                    Media</cite> is an innovative, indispensable, and far-ranging work that
                contextualizes a compact canon of contemporary digital literature within the broader
                twentieth-century modernist tradition of artistic engagement with new media. Bogged
                down by a plodding scholarly proceduralism, the book’s conscientious tone nearly
                muffles a series of lively readings of digital literature. <cite class="title italic">Digital Modernism</cite>’s impressive interdisciplinarity, which combines
                principles from a variety of "new" fields — New Media Studies,
                New Modernist Studies, and New Criticism — is brought to bear on works by William
                Poundstone, Young-Hae Change Heavy Industries (YHCHI), Erik Loyer, Talan Memmott,
                Judd Morrissey, and Mark Z. Danielewski. Pressman argues that these works not only
                contain "immanent critiques of their technocultural
                    context"
                [<a class="ref" href="#pressman2014">Pressman 2014</a>, 156], but also enable us "to
                    see more clearly the world of print"
                [<a class="ref" href="#pressman2014">Pressman 2014</a>, 54]. Refashioning Marshall McLuhan, father of New
                Media Studies, as a midcentury axis or conceptual medium capable of reaching
                backward to modernism and forward to digital culture, Pressman achieves nothing less
                than a new vision of the intellectual and artistic history of new media and
                technology. "What is at stake," she boldly claims, "is nothing short of a better understanding of the significance of
                    literary art, critical reading practices, and humanistic culture in a our
                    networked age"
                [<a class="ref" href="#pressman2014">Pressman 2014</a>, 27]. Due to Pressman’s fierce advocacy of close
                reading, <cite class="title italic">Digital Modernism</cite>’s conceptual eclecticism
                does not impede the clarity of her vision, but it comes at the cost of a narrowness
                in the scope of literary works she investigates — in ways she sometimes compensates
                for and, at other times, does not. </div>
               <div class="counter">
                  <a href="#p2">2</a>
               </div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p2">
                  <cite class="title italic">Digital Modernism</cite>’s opening salvo, Mark Wollaeger and
                Kevin J. Dettmar’s remarkably sassy Series Editors’ Foreword, is structured as a
                FAQ. Anticipating knee-jerk rejections of Pressman’s choice of modernism rather than
                postmodernism as the appropriate period concept for digital literature, the foreword
                reminds us that only a now-defunct distinction between "highbrow"
                and "lowbrow" art buoyed up theories separating modernism from
                postmodernism. "This isn’t the 1980s anymore"
                [<a class="ref" href="#pressman2014">Pressman 2014</a>, x], they only half-jokingly growl, in a way that
                is likely puzzling to those without disciplinary training in modernism. Behind this
                impatience is New Modernist Studies, an interdisciplinary, cultural
                studies-inflected approach to modernist literature dating from 1994 with the
                founding of the journal <cite class="title italic">Modernism/modernity</cite> and the
                inaugural Modernist Studies Association (MSA) Conference in 1999. The journal’s
                inaugural issue announces an interdisciplinary editorial approach grounded in
                modernists’ insistence that "changes in the arts be viewed in
                    conjunction with changes in philosophy, historiography, and social theory, to
                    say nothing of the scientific shifts that they claimed as part of their moment's
                    cultural revolution"
                [<a class="ref" href="#rainey1994">Rainey and von Hallberg 1994</a>, 1]. The MSA Conference crystallized this approach
                by expanding the canon, addressing issues of class, gender, sexuality, race, and
                empire, and emphasizing technology and new media. Pressman’s book seems to fit in
                because it reshapes modernism in light of digital culture and dovetails with the
                latest New Modernist criticism, which has expanded the traditional historical and
                geographical boundaries of what is considered to be "modernist."<a class="noteRef" href="#d3e235">[1]</a> Ultimately, the Foreword’s feisty pugilism,
                like Clint Eastwood in <cite class="title italic">Dirty Harry</cite>, dares you to make
                their day by claiming that Pressman does not subscribe to the policies of canonical,
                temporal, and spatial expansionism under two decades of New Modernist Studies.</div>
               <div class="counter">
                  <a href="#p3">3</a>
               </div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p3">
                  <cite class="title italic">Digital Modernism</cite>’s central insight — that a new genre,
                    "digital modernism," remixes older works of literary modernism to flout
                expectations of contemporary electronic literature — supports these diversifying
                efforts. But Pressman’s modernist canon privileges the usual suspects of Ezra Pound,
                James Joyce, and T. S. Eliot, hearkening back to the "bad
                    modernism" of pre-1994 scholarship.<a class="noteRef" href="#d3e257">[2]</a> The same can be said about Pressman’s digital
                canon, which features authors who have already attracted scholarly attention (the
                fêted YHCHI appears in two chapters) and whose conscious literariness makes them
                legible to traditional scholarship. With this caveat, we can answer their parting
                question, "Should I not only read this book but also assign it
                    in classes and give it to all my friends and family?"
                [<a class="ref" href="#pressman2014">Pressman 2014</a>, x], in the affirmative answer (though it
                certainly depends on one’s family).</div>
               <div class="counter">
                  <a href="#p4">4</a>
               </div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p4">The foreword’s cheekiness does not offset the stiffness that calcifies much of the
                book inside its stringently cultivated framework of signposts, justifications, and
                qualifications. This is particularly true of the dauntingly learned Introduction,
                which, with its fifteen-page section "Defining My Terms"
                (itself divided into five subsections) prefacing sections on "The Stakes of My Argument,"
                "Critical Influences," and "Chapter
                    Summaries," reads like a book prospectus and distances readers from the
                clear, dynamic, and ingenious close readings yet to come. That the Introduction
                skips from "Part II" straight to "Part IV" suggests that even an Oxford University Press copyeditor cannot
                keep this structural rabbit warren straight. Of course, the micromanaging
                Introduction has a serious purpose: to convince serious readers that electronic
                literature is serious stuff. Pressman explains, <blockquote>
                     <p>
                    There is a countermovement underway, this book argues, a
                        serious effort to encourage digital literature to be taken seriously....
                        [T]he majority of this book focuses on Internet-based literature in order to
                        show how and why one of the most maligned of literary spaces, the web — one
                        accused of fostering reading habits that destroy deep attention and devalue
                        hermeneutic analysis — is actually the place where serious literature stages
                        its rebellion and renaissance.
                     [<a class="ref" href="#pressman2014">Pressman 2014</a>, 8–9]
                </p>
                  </blockquote>
               </div>
               <div class="counter">
                  <a href="#p5">5</a>
               </div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p5">This is indeed an important task, and Pressman is equal to it. Her close readings of
                digital literature do "reward" (one of her key terms) her
                attention, and they do "renovate" (another key term)
                modernism by revealing its imbrication in contemporary digital culture. "Remediate" completes the core lexicon of <cite class="title italic">Digital Modernism</cite>, which adds to Bolter and Grusin’s
                concept [<a class="ref" href="#bolter2000">Bolter and Grusin 2000</a>] a new affordance: close reading. Pressman’s
                comparison of early twentieth-century modernism and contemporary digital modernism
                reveals that remediation is both a product of and an invitation to close reading,
                which "rewards" critical attention by "renovating" texts and technologies. In doing so, <cite class="title italic">Digital Modernism </cite>effectively remediates not just
                modernist new media, but indeed close reading itself — hence this review’s
                title.</div>
               <div class="counter">
                  <a href="#p6">6</a>
               </div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p6">The Introduction responsibly, if ponderously, hits its required disciplinary beats by
                defining modernism, electronic literature, digital modernism, close reading, and New
                Criticism. Readers from a variety of fields are swiftly caught up to speed, ensuring
                the book’s accessibility to a broad audience. In defining close reading as a "careful application of focused attention to the formal operations
                    in a literary text"
                [<a class="ref" href="#pressman2014">Pressman 2014</a>, 11], Pressman strikes a strong blow in the battle
                quantitative formalism now wages against close reading.<a class="noteRef" href="#d3e338">[3]</a> A close reading-positive critic, she claims
                that her texts inherently contain complexity: they "suggest,"
                "invite,"
                "encourage,"
                "push," even "propel"
                [<a class="ref" href="#pressman2014">Pressman 2014</a>, 76] all sorts of readings. Assuredly,
                    <em class="emph">readers</em> are rewarded by attending to Pressman’s close readings, but
                the degree to which we owe this brilliance to the text or to the critic’s ingenuity
                remains an open question.</div>
               <div class="counter">
                  <a href="#p7">7</a>
               </div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p7">Pressman’s most controversial definitions cover electronic literature and New
                Criticism. She defines electronic literature through aesthetic and material criteria
                — "born-digital" works that are "computational and processural, dependent upon the operations of the machine for
                    its aesthetic effects"
                [<a class="ref" href="#pressman2014">Pressman 2014</a>, 1] — an austere characterization that makes no
                reference to the Internet, networks, or multimedia. Pressman restricts her gaze
                further by focusing on digital modernism, a subgenre that rejects mainstream
                electronic literature’s investment in hyperlinks, interactivity, and multimedia. As
                a result, when she deprecates the "small but certain
                    canon"
                [<a class="ref" href="#pressman2014">Pressman 2014</a>, 6] of first-generation electronic literature, we
                could retort that she simply replaces it with a<em class="emph"> different</em> small but
                certain canon. Still, <cite class="title italic">Digital Modernism</cite>’s canon hangs
                together by other means than the rubber stamping of an expert’s approval: digital
                modernism "renovates" and "remixes
                    literary modernism" by being "text based,
                    aesthetically difficult, and ambivalent in [its] relationship to mass media and
                    popular culture"
                [<a class="ref" href="#pressman2014">Pressman 2014</a>, 2]. Like the earlier modernism it remediates,
                digital modernism "challenges traditional expectations about
                    what art is and does. It illuminates and interrogates the cultural
                    infrastructures, technological networks, and critical practices that support and
                    enable these judgments"
                [<a class="ref" href="#pressman2014">Pressman 2014</a>, 10].</div>
               <div class="counter">
                  <a href="#p8">8</a>
               </div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p8">This account savors somewhat of Theodor Adorno’s immanent critique and Frankfurt
                School social criticism,<a class="noteRef" href="#d3e412">[4]</a> but Pressman submerges the Adornian themes in
                favor of the New Criticism she so passionately champions. Paradoxically, it is
                precisely this championing of "old" methods that makes <cite class="title italic">Digital Modernism</cite> so refreshing in debates over the fate
                of close reading in the face of new methods from the digital humanities (DH). She
                positions Marshall McLuhan as a central figure in the scholarly uptake of the New
                Critical principles first espoused by I. A. Richards and F. R. Leavis. As <cite class="title italic">Digital Modernism</cite> uncovers layers of technological and
                aesthetic histories contributing to electronic literature, its reuptake of close
                reading can be seen as anticipating Matthew Kirschenbaum’s recent essay "What Is 'Digital Humanities,' and Why Are They Saying Such
                    Terrible Things About It?"
                [<a class="ref" href="#kirschenbaum2014">Kirschenbaum 2014</a>]. This essay calls for DH to turn its analysis on
                itself, praising Alan Liu’s "The Meaning of the Digital
                    Humanities"
                [<a class="ref" href="#liu2013">Liu 2013</a>] for its Science Studies-style analysis of a single DH
                project. Kirschenbaum exhorts us to "detail the material
                    conditions of knowledge production," including "usage
                    patterns" and "citation networks"
                [<a class="ref" href="#kirschenbaum2014">Kirschenbaum 2014</a>, 60] — to do, in other words, what Pressman
                does for New Criticism. </div>
               <div class="counter">
                  <a href="#p9">9</a>
               </div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p9">Recuperating the New Critical heritage in foundational texts of New Media Studies —
                chiefly <cite class="title italic">The Mechanical Bride</cite>
                [<a class="ref" href="#mcluhan1951">McLuhan 1951</a>], <cite class="title italic">The Gutenberg Galaxy</cite>
                [<a class="ref" href="#mcluhan1962">McLuhan 1962</a>], and <cite class="title italic"> Understanding Media</cite>
                [<a class="ref" href="#mcluhan1964">McLuhan 1964</a>] — takes up Chapter One. Pressman moves far beyond hoary
                chestnuts about the global village and the medium being the message, revealing that
                his method "was always approaching the broader category of the
                    literary <em class="emph">within</em> complex media ecologies"
                [<a class="ref" href="#pressman2014">Pressman 2014</a>, 29]. Advocating a "slow,
                    focused attention and rigorous consideration" of texts [<a class="ref" href="#pressman2014">Pressman 2014</a>, 13], Pressman echoes recent reevaluations of New
                Criticism that cut through the stale, straw-men stereotypes that often compromise
                critiques of close reading. <a class="noteRef" href="#d3e495">[5]</a> Though she supports the efforts of Critical
                Code Studies to analyze code regardless of its output, it "should not replace rigorous analysis of the aesthetic ambitions and results of
                    technopoetic pursuits"
                [<a class="ref" href="#pressman2014">Pressman 2014</a>, 20]. Close reading, as an avant-garde critical
                response that respects aesthetic complexity, provides this rigor — and pleasure: <blockquote>
                     <p>
                    For anyone who has read a good close reading, one that takes
                        you through a journey in a text that you’ve read before and teaches you to
                        see it anew, you know how transformative the experience can be. A good close
                        reading can change your mind. It can make you reread and reconsider. Close
                        reading can be not only about art but can become art, and for the New
                        Critics, this was part of the point.
                     [<a class="ref" href="#pressman2014">Pressman 2014</a>, 14]
                </p>
                  </blockquote>
               </div>
               <div class="counter">
                  <a href="#p10">10</a>
               </div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p10">By claiming that close readings are themselves cultural artifacts, Pressman elegantly
                sidesteps arguments that close reading demands a single "correct"
                interpretation. Although some of the stronger claims about McLuhan’s digital hipness
                force the issue through diction — he apparently knows "how
                    different data sources and circuits of flow constitute a literary
                    experience"
                [<a class="ref" href="#pressman2014">Pressman 2014</a>, 35] — her genealogy joining modernism and digital
                modernism through McLuhan is otherwise solid.</div>
               <div class="counter">
                  <a href="#p11">11</a>
               </div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p11">Chapter Two, "Reading Machines: MACHINE POETRY AND EXCAVATORY
                    READING in William Poundstone’s electronic literature and Bob Brown’s
                    Readies," surveys early reading technologies, both real (the
                tachistoscope, subliminal advertising) and imagined (the hypothetical
                    "Readies" machine dreamed up by American modernist Bob
                Brown). This survey demonstrates "that technologies of reading,
                    not just writing, are an integral part of American literary history"
                [<a class="ref" href="#pressman2014">Pressman 2014</a>, 57] and that "our reading
                    practices [are] always shaped by historical contexts and media formats"
                [<a class="ref" href="#pressman2014">Pressman 2014</a>, 60]. Although the stories of these technologies
                have been told elsewhere — the chapter relies heavily on <cite class="title italic">Swift
                    Viewing</cite>
                [<a class="ref" href="#acland2013">Acland 2013</a>] and <cite class="title italic">Suspensions of
                    Perception</cite>
                [<a class="ref" href="#crary1999">Crary 1999</a>] — what Pressman adds to these media-archaeological
                accounts is, as one should expect, excellent close readings, particularly of William
                Poundstone’s <cite class="title italic">Project for the Tachistoscope {Bottomless
                    Pit}</cite>. For me, this reading of <cite class="title italic">Project</cite> is
                incomplete: in calling the text a "parable about reading in the
                    midst of medial shift," Pressman empties Poundstone’s Flash narrative of
                its critical charge. Is the bottomless pit, whose sudden and troubling appearance
                constitutes <cite class="title italic">Project</cite>’s plot, really only "a symbolic entity: a thing to read"
                [<a class="ref" href="#pressman2014">Pressman 2014</a>, 62], or is it also something very literal —
                perhaps a timely representation of fracking, which has caused all-too-real
                collapsing sinkhole pits to appear all across the United States, from New Mexico to
                Pennsylvania? </div>
               <div class="counter">
                  <a href="#p12">12</a>
               </div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p12">This lack of attention to current events is, again, likely a space issue but worth
                mentioning because critiques of New Criticism single out its ahistoricism. Chapter
                Three, "Speed Reading: Super-position and Simultaneity in
                    YHCHI’s <cite class="title italic">Dakota</cite> and Ezra Pound’s <cite class="title italic">Cantos</cite>," shares this blindness. Pressman
                develops another "excavatory" reading in her analysis of <cite class="title italic">Dakota</cite>, but it, too, could be literally about excavation,
                as its South Dakota-to-South Korea setting documents the transformation of a state
                during a twenty-first century gold rush for the minerals on which <cite class="title italic">Dakota</cite>’s Flash iterations depend. Space constraints thus
                leave chinks in <cite class="title italic">Digital Modernism</cite>’s erudite armor. The
                last half of Chapter Two, for example, relies on Pressman’s access to a rare text:
                the 1931 collection of poems Bob Brown commissioned from major modernists, including
                Gertrude Stein, Filippo Marinetti, and William Carlos Williams, for Brown’s Readies
                machine. Pressman argues that "these poems are textual acts of
                    programming; they are code"
                [<a class="ref" href="#pressman2014">Pressman 2014</a>, 72]. This parallel is more than a metaphor, and
                it is one of the most powerful, successful theses in <cite class="title italic">Digital
                    Reading</cite>. Unfortunately, its corresponding close reading is allotted a
                single paragraph. </div>
               <div class="counter">
                  <a href="#p13">13</a>
               </div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p13">To be fair, though, when the reader pushes past the forest of scholarly apparatuses,
                the masterful close readings lying in wait are well worth the price of admission.
                The sixteen-page close reading of <cite class="title italic">Dakota</cite> is sheer joy:
                beautifully written, snappily paced, and filled-to-bursting with ideas. As it layers
                evidence showing that <cite class="title italic">Dakota</cite> is a close reading of
                Pound’s <cite class="title italic">Cantos</cite>, it argues that <cite class="title italic">Dakota</cite> elicits both close reading and speed reading. <cite class="title italic">Dakota</cite>’s "retroaesthetic"
                [<a class="ref" href="#pressman2014">Pressman 2014</a>, 90] therefore challenges assumptions about
                digital reading practices, revealing that "identity is
                    distributed across and informed by network technologies"
                [<a class="ref" href="#pressman2014">Pressman 2014</a>, 92]. But no more about <cite class="title italic">Dakota</cite>. Readers of <cite class="title italic">Digital Humanities
                    Quarterly</cite> are simply exhorted to read this unforgettable section of
                    <cite class="title italic">Digital Modernism</cite>.</div>
               <div class="counter">
                  <a href="#p14">14</a>
               </div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p14">Chapter Four, "Reading the Database: Narrative, Database, and
                    Stream of Consciousness," reviews contemporary electronic adaptations of
                James Joyce’s <cite class="title italic">Ulysses</cite> (1922) to show that "our definitions of 'novel'...change and adjust under the
                    influence of digital databases"
                [<a class="ref" href="#pressman2014">Pressman 2014</a>, 123]. Without falling into technological
                determinism, Pressman analyzes Twitter, Flash, and print adaptations to show that
                they share a "database aesthetic" intended to provide
                access to human cognition. <cite class="title italic">Digital Modernism</cite> shows that
                these iterations are invested in representing cognition by unpacking traces of
                    <cite class="title italic">Ulysses</cite> in them: a Twitter performance by Ian
                Bogost and Ian McCarthy, Judd Morrissey and Lori Talley’s <cite class="title italic">The
                    Jew’s Daughter</cite>, and Talan Memmott's <cite class="title italic">My Molly
                    (Departed)</cite>. Pressman’s engaging descriptions reveal that the most famous
                modernist invention — the "stream of consciousness" developed from William
                James’s psychology — models cognition as a database-based operation of search and
                retrieval. This chapter concludes that consciousness is "always
                    mediated and distributed across technologies"
                [<a class="ref" href="#pressman2014">Pressman 2014</a>, 103]. Though the argumentation is generally
                persuasive, I regret Pressman’s Joyce-centrism. <cite class="title italic">Digital
                    Modernisms</cite> refers to an outdated canon of modernism that privileges the
                    "men of 1914" (T. S. Eliot, Ezra Pound, James Joyce, Wyndham
                Lewis). Can Pressman find no electronic renovations of, say, Virginia Woolf, May
                Sinclair, or Dorothy Richardson to balance the book’s elaborations of Joyce, Pound,
                and Eliot? And if not, what does that say about digital modernism?</div>
               <div class="counter">
                  <a href="#p15">15</a>
               </div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p15">Though digital modernism does not conform to the expanded modernist canon, it does
                share modernism’s difficulty. Digital modernism "rejects popular
                    expectations of what it means to play new media objects"
                [<a class="ref" href="#pressman2014">Pressman 2014</a>, 122] and reveals that "what
                    we think to be real and analog about humanness is actually the result of digital
                    production"
                [<a class="ref" href="#pressman2014">Pressman 2014</a>, 124]. It also makes interpretation a "nightmarish task"
                [<a class="ref" href="#pressman2014">Pressman 2014</a>, 108]. About <cite class="title italic">The Jew’s
                    Daughter</cite>, Pressman shares "a personal
                    confession": <blockquote>
                     <p>
                    [T]he difficulty of deciphering this work compelled me to
                        undertake dramatic non-media-specific efforts. In order to follow the
                        narrative, I resorted to printing out all of the screens and, on each page,
                        highlighting in one color what text had changed and in a different color
                        what text would change. I also kept a detailed list of notes identifying the
                        main characters. But, even with this skeleton key, I hesitate to attribute
                        proper names to the ‘anonymous limbs and parts’ I collected, assembled, and
                        discuss in this chapter. Morrissey’s text is incredibly difficult, and it
                        depends on a disciplined reading practice.
                     [<a class="ref" href="#pressman2014">Pressman 2014</a>, 109]
                </p>
                  </blockquote>
               </div>
               <div class="counter">
                  <a href="#p16">16</a>
               </div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p16">This "confession" is hardly shameful. In this passage Pressman
                describes not just close reading, but indeed close <em class="emph">re</em>reading, thus
                    "making new" traditional techniques of scholarship
                (note-taking, list-making). Some brave critic may develop different tools for
                wrangling these resistant electronic texts, perhaps tools <em class="emph">accepting</em> the
                fast-paced, hard-to-read, sensory-overloading style, appreciating difficulty as an
                aesthetic experience rather than <em class="emph">overcoming</em> it. Until then, Pressman’s
                strategy of combining close reading and media archaeology is rigorous and
                effective.</div>
               <div class="counter">
                  <a href="#p17">17</a>
               </div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p17">The fifth chapter, "Reading Code: The Hallucination of Universal
                    Language from Modernism to Cyberspace," is by far the longest, perhaps
                because it performs the kind of political critique that I found lacking in the
                second and third chapters. Pressman takes over a hundred pages to explore the
                insights that emerge "when computing and literature are
                    approached as sharing a historical and ideological core"
                [<a class="ref" href="#pressman2014">Pressman 2014</a>, 137]. Interpreting Eric Loyer’s digital novel
                    <cite class="title italic">Chroma</cite> within the broader Western tradition seeking
                universal language, Pressman demythologizes the "belief that
                    universal language is possible with the right textual code. This belief
                    undergirds ideologies that code is universal and that cyberspace (or even
                    digital culture more broadly) is natural or inevitable"
                [<a class="ref" href="#pressman2014">Pressman 2014</a>, 129]. After <cite class="title italic">Chroma</cite>,
                Pressman analyzes YHCHI’s <cite class="title italic">Nippon</cite> as "as a critique of the homogenizing influence of the English-based
                    and Western-focused web"
                [<a class="ref" href="#pressman2014">Pressman 2014</a>, 154] and of "poets and
                    philosophers [who] have fantasized about Chinese as universal code"
                [<a class="ref" href="#pressman2014">Pressman 2014</a>, 143]. <cite class="title italic">Nippon</cite>’s
                difficulty dramatizes how computers work by translation and approximation, thereby
                    "disabl[ing] contemporary hallucinations about universal
                    language"
                [<a class="ref" href="#pressman2014">Pressman 2014</a>, 151]. In persuading us to resist "imaginative narratives, theories, and mythologies about the
                    natural and universal power of digital code"
                [<a class="ref" href="#pressman2014">Pressman 2014</a>, 137], Pressman demonstrates why cultural and
                political critique is still relevant.</div>
               <div class="counter">
                  <a href="#p18">18</a>
               </div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p18">Half the length of Chapter Five, the brisk concluding chapter, "CODA — Rereading: Digital Modernism in Print, Mark Z. Danielewski’s <cite class="title italic">Only Revolutions</cite>," incorporates this print
                novel to show "all literature...is impacted by
                    digitality"
                [<a class="ref" href="#pressman2014">Pressman 2014</a>, 158]. In this case, even non-electronic
                literature "demands that the reader reread in order to close
                    read"
                [<a class="ref" href="#pressman2014">Pressman 2014</a>, 161]. This 2006 epic of a pair of doomed but
                free-spirited road-trippers, from which Danielewski consciously jettisoned
                references to media, might seem an unlikely specimen. But if "the strategy of digital modernism" involves "making
                    it new" by "a recursive act of engaging with a
                    literary past through media"
                [<a class="ref" href="#pressman2014">Pressman 2014</a>, 158], then <cite class="title italic">Only
                    Revolutions</cite> belongs. As a conclusion, the Coda cleverly uses <cite class="title italic">Only Revolutions</cite> to review the broader argument that
                digital modernism illuminates both modernism and the history of New Media. Here
                Pressman finally relaxes — the Coda fancifully describes <cite class="title italic">Only
                    Revolutions</cite>’s included bookmarks as "meeting in the
                    middle" and "kissing"
                [<a class="ref" href="#pressman2014">Pressman 2014</a>, 173] and disarmingly identifies which of
                Danielewski’s crowd-sourced data points was her personal submission [<a class="ref" href="#pressman2014">Pressman 2014</a>, 170] — and makes rewarding read out of what could
                have been a banal retread. This tonal anomaly, when considered as a performative
                extension of her argument, has a purpose: <cite class="title italic">Digital
                    Modernism</cite> remediates scholarship itself as it reveals close reading to
                be immanent to digital culture, so Pressman is rereading herself. Only one
                difficulty remains. If the dream of universal language is, as Pressman argues, a
                dangerous hallucination, and if close reading can be applied to any text, is close
                reading the scholar’s final hallucination?</div>
        
        
            

        
            </div>
            <div id="notes">
               <h2>Notes</h2>
               <div class="endnote" id="d3e235">
                  <span class="noteRef">[1]</span> I refer
                    here to the recent trend of approaching modernism through a transnational
                    approach. For more about this temporal and geographic expansion, see "The New Modernist Studies"
                    [<a class="ref" href="#mao2008">Mao and Walkowitz 2008</a>].</div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d3e257">
                  <span class="noteRef">[2]</span> To learn more about "bad modernism," see the edited collection of the same
                    name, <cite class="title italic">Bad Modernism</cite>
                    [<a class="ref" href="#mao2006">Mao and Walkowitz 2006</a>].</div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d3e338">
                  <span class="noteRef">[3]</span> For a discussion of
                    the debate over the future of close reading in literary studies, see "In Praise of Overstating the Case: A Review of Franco
                        Moretti’s <cite class="title italic">Close Reading</cite>"
                    [<a class="ref" href="#ross2014">Ross 2014</a>].</div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d3e412">
                  <span class="noteRef">[4]</span> The Frankfurt School refers, of course, to the group
                    of Marxist thinkers originally based out of the Frankfurt School for Social
                    Research. Adorno, Max Horkheimer, Walter Benjamin, Herbert Marcuse, and Jürgen
                    Habermas are generally considered among its practitioners. Immanent critique
                    refers to Adorno’s revision of Hegelian dialectics. For more on "immanent
                        critique," see his <cite class="title italic">Negative Dialectics</cite>
                    [<a class="ref" href="#adorno1966">Adorno 1966</a>]; for a general introduction to Frankfurt School
                    theory and method, see <cite class="title italic">The Dialectical Imagination</cite>
                    [<a class="ref" href="#jay1996">Jay 1996</a>].</div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d3e495">
                  <span class="noteRef">[5]</span> For other scholarly accounts that advocate New
                    Criticism, see <cite class="title italic">Praising It New: The Best of the New
                        Criticism</cite>
                    [<a class="ref" href="#davis2008">Davis 2008</a>] and Miranda Hickman and John McIntyre’s <cite class="title italic">Rereading the New Criticism</cite>
                    [<a class="ref" href="#hickman2012">Hickman and McIntyre 2012</a>].</div>
            </div>
            <div id="worksCited">
               <h2>Works Cited</h2>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="acland2013"><!-- close -->Acland 2013</span> Acland, Charles. <cite class="title italic">Swift Viewing: The Popular Life of Subliminal Influence. </cite>Durham,
                    NC: Duke University Press, 2013.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="adorno1966"><!-- close -->Adorno 1966</span> Adorno, Theodor. <cite class="title italic">Negative Dialectics</cite>. Trans. E. B. Ashton. New York: Routledge,
                    1966.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="bolter2000"><!-- close -->Bolter and Grusin 2000</span> Bolter, Jay David and
                    Richard Grusin. <cite class="title italic">Remediation: Understanding New
                        Media</cite>. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="crary1999"><!-- close -->Crary 1999</span> Crary, Jonathan. <cite class="title italic">Suspensions of Perception: Attention, Spectacle, and Modern
                    Culture</cite>. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1999.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="davis2008"><!-- close -->Davis 2008</span> Davis, Garrick, ed. <cite class="title italic">Praising It New: The Best of the New Criticism</cite>. Columbus, OH: Ohio
                    University Press, 2008.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="derrida1984"><!-- close -->Derrida 1984</span> Derrida, Jacques. "Two Words for Joyce." In Derek Attridge and Daniel
                    Ferrer (eds.), <cite class="title italic">Post-Structural Joyce: Essays from the
                        French</cite>. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984, pp.
                    145-185.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="hickman2012"><!-- close -->Hickman and McIntyre 2012</span> Hickman, Miranda and
                    John McIntyre, eds. <cite class="title italic">Rereading the New Criticism</cite>.
                    Columbus, OH: Ohio University Press, 2012.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="james2014"><!-- close -->James and Seshagiri 2014</span> James, David and Urmila
                    Seshagiri. "Metamodernism: Narratives of Continuity and
                        Revolution."
                    <cite class="title italic">PMLA</cite> 129.1 (2014): 87-100.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="jay1996"><!-- close -->Jay 1996</span> Jay, Martin. <cite class="title italic">The
                        Dialectical Imagination: A History of the Frankfurt School and the Institute
                        of Social Research, 1923-1950.</cite> Berkeley, CA: University of
                    California Press, 1996.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="kirschenbaum2014"><!-- close -->Kirschenbaum 2014</span> Kirschenbaum, Matthew.
                        "What is 'Digital Humanities,' and Why Are They
                        Saying Such Terrible Things about It?"
                    <cite class="title italic">differences </cite>25.1 (2014): 46-63.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="liu2013"><!-- close -->Liu 2013</span> Liu, Alan. "The Meaning
                        of the Digital Humanities."
                    <cite class="title italic">PMLA </cite>128 (2013): 409-23. </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="mao2006"><!-- close -->Mao and Walkowitz 2006</span> Mao, Douglas and Rebecca
                    Walkowitz, eds. <cite class="title italic">Bad Modernisms</cite>. Durham, N.C.: Duke
                    University Press, 2006.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="mao2008"><!-- close -->Mao and Walkowitz 2008</span> Mao, Douglas and Rebecca
                    Walkowitz. "The New Modernist Studies."
                    <cite class="title italic">PMLA </cite>123.3 (2008): 737-48.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="mcluhan1951"><!-- close -->McLuhan 1951</span> McLuhan, Marshall. <cite class="title italic">The Mechanical Bride: Folklore of Industrial Man</cite>.
                    1951. Berkeley, CA: Gingko Press, 2002.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="mcluhan1962"><!-- close -->McLuhan 1962</span> McLuhan, Marshall. <cite class="title italic">The Gutenberg Galaxy: The Making of Typographic Man</cite>.
                    Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1962.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="mcluhan1964"><!-- close -->McLuhan 1964</span> McLuhan, Marshall.<cite class="title italic">Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man</cite>. 1964.
                    Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="pressman2014"><!-- close -->Pressman 2014</span> Pressman, Jessica. <cite class="title italic">Digital Modernism: Making it New in New Media</cite>. Oxford:
                    Oxford University Press, 2014.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="rainey1994"><!-- close -->Rainey and von Hallberg 1994</span> Rainey, Lawrence, and
                    Robert von Hallberg. "Editorial/Introduction."<cite class="title italic"> Modernism/modernity</cite> 1.1 (1994): 1-3. </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="ross2014"><!-- close -->Ross 2014</span> Ross, Shawna. "In
                        Praise of Overstating the Case: A Review of Franco Moretti’s <cite class="title italic">Distant Reading</cite>."
                    <cite class="title italic">Digital Humanities Quarterly</cite> 8.1 (2014). <a class="ref"
                     href="http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/8/1/000171/000171.html"
                     onclick="window.open('http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/8/1/000171/000171.html'); return false">http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/8/1/000171/000171.html</a>
               </div>
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar">
               <a href="#">Preview</a>  |  <span style="color: grey">XML</span> |  <a href="#"
                  onclick="javascript:window.print();"
                  title="Click for print friendly version">Print Article</a>
            </div>
         </div>
      </div>
   </body>
</html>
