<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <title>[PREVIEW] DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly: </title>
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_screen.css" media="screen" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_print.css" media="print" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
      <style type="text/css">
        #mainContent {
          float: none;
          padding-top: 2em;
          padding-left: 4em;
          padding-right: 4em;
          margin-left: 225px;
           
        }</style>
      <script src="../../common/js/javascriptLibrary.js" type="text/javascript"/>
   </head>
   <body>
      <div id="mainContent">
         <div class="DHQarticle">
            <div id="pubInfo">Preview<br/>Volume 009 Number </div>
            <div class="toolbar">
               <form id="taporware" action="get">
                  <div>
                     <a href="/dhq/preview/index.html">Preview</a>
                     | 
                    <a rel="external" href="/dhq/vol/9//000199&#xA;                .xml">XML</a>

| 
		   Discuss
			(<a href="/dhq/vol/9//000199&#xA;                /000199&#xA;                .html#disqus_thread" data-disqus-identifier="000199&#xA;                ">
				Comments
			</a>)
                </div>
               </form>
            </div>
    
            <div class="DHQheader">
        
            
               
               <h1 class="articleTitle">Textual Artifacts and their
                    Digital Representations: Teaching Graduate Students to
                        Build Online Archive</h1>
                
               <div class="author">
                  <span style="color: grey">Deena Engel</span> &lt;<a href="mailto:deena_dot_engel_at_nyu_dot_edu" onclick="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('deena_dot_engel_at_nyu_dot_edu'); return false;" onkeypress="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('deena_dot_engel_at_nyu_dot_edu'); return false;">deena_dot_engel_at_nyu_dot_edu</a>&gt;, New York University</div>
                
               <div class="author">
                  <span style="color: grey">Marion Thain</span> &lt;<a href="mailto:marion_dot_thain_at_nyu_dot_edu" onclick="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('marion_dot_thain_at_nyu_dot_edu'); return false;" onkeypress="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('marion_dot_thain_at_nyu_dot_edu'); return false;">marion_dot_thain_at_nyu_dot_edu</a>&gt;, New York University</div>
            
            

            
        
        
        
        
    
               <span xmlns="" class="Z3988" title="url_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;rft_val_fmt=info%3Aofi%2Ffmt%3Akev%3Amtx%3Ajournal&amp;rfr_id=info%3Asid%2Fzotero.org%3A2&amp;rft.genre=article&amp;rft.atitle=Textual%20Artifacts%20and%20their%20Digital%20Representations%3A%20Teaching%20Graduate%20Students%20to%20Build%20Online%20Archive&amp;rft.jtitle=Digital%20Humanities%20Quarterly&amp;rft.stitle=DHQ&amp;rft.issn=1938-4122&amp;rft.date=&amp;rft.volume=009&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.aulast=Engel&amp;rft.aufirst=Deena&amp;rft.au=Deena%20Engel&amp;rft.au=Marion%20Thain"> </span>
            </div>

    
            <div id="DHQtext">
        
            
               <div id="abstract">
                  <h2>Abstract</h2>
                
                  <p>Co-teaching a digital archives course (ENGL-GA.2971)
                    for graduate students in the English Department
                    allowed us to bring together our expertise in both
                    research and pedagogy from two fields: English
                    Literature and Computer Science. The course built on
                    a core pedagogical principle in Computer Science of
                    teaching through projects rather than from unrelated
                    one-off programming or web development assignments.
                    Teaching the Text Encoding Initiative after students
                    had completed hands-on projects (using xHTML, CSS,
                    and a digital archive working in a standard content
                    management system) enabled the building of
                    technological skill sets in a logical and
                    complementary manner. From a literary perspective,
                    building a digital archive — and teaching text
                    encoding — enabled an in-depth consideration of
                    textual materiality, the processes through which
                    literary scholarship must inform technological
                    building decisions, and the ways in which the act of
                    digitization can be used to ask new questions of the
                    text (or to prompt the text to ask new questions of
                    itself). This paper will survey our techniques and
                    approaches to interdisciplinary teaching,
                    culminating in our usage of text encoding for
                    exploring issues of textuality through digital
                    presentation.</p>
            
               </div>
            
        
        
            
               <div class="div div0">
                 
                  <h1 class="head">Introduction</h1>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p1">1</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p1">This article reflects on the practice of designing
                            and implementing a course that aimed to teach
                            graduate students in English the skills to build a
                            scholarly online digital archive from primary source
                            materials. A founding principle of our pedagogical
                            practice is the integration of CS and DH methods. As
                            a still fairly young pedagogical field, discussion
                            and sharing on this topic might, we hope, be timely
                            and useful to others. This course was part of an
                            evolving response to the key current pedagogical
                            challenge of teaching graduate students in English
                            how to synthesize a new set of technological skills
                            with literary expertise to discover new ways of
                            working and new questions to ask of their texts.</div>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p2">2</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p2">The ultimate ambition of our course was for each
                            student to digitize text otherwise inaccessible
                            beyond the material archive. As such the focus was
                            on dealing with manuscript materials, marginalia and
                            other editorial markings on typescripts, and
                            materials that had a particular material
                            instantiation. The students were free to choose
                            their focal materials to reflect their own
                            interests, and had access to the manuscripts
                            collections and Fales’ special collections in the
                            Bobst Library at New York University. The resulting
                            digital archives included, for example, collections
                            of nineteenth- or twentieth-century letters by
                            well-known writers; manuscript drafts of what went
                            on to become well-known literary texts; type-script
                            drafts of literary essays; and even a collection of
                            contemporary hand-made ‘zines’. Each archive
                            included images of the documents, transcriptions,
                            TEI encodings, contextualization through further
                            reading lists, and prose narratives about their
                            materials and their digital archival practice.</div>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p3">3</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p3">New York University’s Department of English first
                            offered a course on creating online archives from
                            primary source materials in the fall, 2011 semester
                            under the course number and title <cite class="title italic">ENGL-GA.2957-001 Special Topics in Literary
                                Theory: Literary Archives and Web Development.
                                (</cite>The course home page, hosted by the
                            Department of Computer Science at New York
                            University can be found at <a class="ref" href="http://cs.nyu.edu/courses/fall11/ENGL-GA.2957-001/DT_openingPage.html" onclick="window.open('http://cs.nyu.edu/courses/fall11/ENGL-GA.2957-001/DT_openingPage.html'); return false">http://cs.nyu.edu/courses/fall11/ENGL-GA.2957-001/DT_openingPage.html</a>). This course built on earlier experience in the
                            Computer Science Department on teaching topics in
                            the Digital Humanities through an undergraduate
                            Special Topics course <cite class="title italic">CSCI-UA.380</cite>
                            
                     <cite class="title italic">Computing in the Humanities and
                                the Arts</cite>. (CSCI-UA.380 <cite class="title italic">Computing in the Humanities and the Arts</cite>
                            has been offered five times from the fall, 2007
                            semester through the fall, 2014. semester; see <a class="ref" href="http://cs.nyu.edu/courses/fall14/CSCI-UA.0380-002/HC_index_fa14.php" onclick="window.open('http://cs.nyu.edu/courses/fall14/CSCI-UA.0380-002/HC_index_fa14.php'); return false">http://cs.nyu.edu/courses/fall14/CSCI-UA.0380-002/HC_index_fa14.php</a>). The undergraduate Computer Science course is
                            taught within the context of the Computer Science
                            Department Web Programming minor (<a class="ref" href="http://cs.nyu.edu/webapps/content/academic/undergrad/minors" onclick="window.open('http://cs.nyu.edu/webapps/content/academic/undergrad/minors'); return false">http://cs.nyu.edu/webapps/content/academic/undergrad/minors</a>) and has two pre-requisites (one semester each in
                            computer programming and in web design) [<a class="ref" href="#engel2013">Engel 2013</a>]. In each iteration of the undergraduate
                            course, the capstone project included building an
                            online digital archive from primary source
                            materials; some of the results of this collaboration
                            between the New York University Library and Archives
                            and the Department of Computer Science are described
                            in published essays. [<a class="ref" href="#mitchell2012">Mitchell et al 2012</a>];
                                    [<a class="ref" href="#bunde2010a">Bunde and Engel 2010a</a>]; [<a class="ref" href="#bunde2010b">Bunde and Engel 2010b</a>].</div>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p4">4</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p4">The course under discussion in this article, <cite class="title italic">ENGL-GA.2971</cite>
                            
                     <cite class="title italic">Practicum in Digital
                                Humanities</cite> was given in the fall, 2013
                            semester in a new format in which it was designed
                            and co-taught collaboratively by two faculty
                            members, one each from the English and Computer
                            Science departments. (The course home page, hosted
                            by the Department of Computer Science at New York
                            University can be found at <a class="ref" href="http://cs.nyu.edu/courses/fall13/ENGL-GA.2971-001/DT_index_fa13.php" onclick="window.open('http://cs.nyu.edu/courses/fall13/ENGL-GA.2971-001/DT_index_fa13.php'); return false">http://cs.nyu.edu/courses/fall13/ENGL-GA.2971-001/DT_index_fa13.php</a>) As computer systems become more integrated into
                            and integral to studies in many fields, the
                            development of courses that offer training in
                            technology is becoming more and more relevant
                            outside of Computer Science departments. [<a class="ref" href="#guzdial2005">Guzdial and Forte 2005</a>] In addition, the role of web
                            development in current Computer Science pedagogy is
                            widely studied and discussed [<a class="ref" href="#park2011">Park and Wiedenbeck 2011</a>]; [<a class="ref" href="#wang2009">Wang and Zahadat 2009</a>];
                            [<a class="ref" href="#yue2004">Yue and Ding 2004</a>].
                            From a pedagogical standpoint, this course offered
                            the Computer Science department an opportunity to
                            devise materials and a curriculum to best meet the
                            needs of our growing student body in the Humanities
                            who wish to augment their studies with computational
                            and technological skills. As it ran in 2011 the
                            course was very successful in bringing humanities
                            computing skills to students in the English
                            department. Building on this success, the
                            introduction of a literature professor (with
                            expertise in editing, and creating online archives
                            of manuscript materials) as a co-teacher was
                            designed to help expand the remit by forging greater
                            connection with current debates within the
                            humanities, and particularly within literary
                            studies. The syllabus for the course can be found in
                            the appendix. </div>
            
               </div>
            
               <div class="div div0">
                
                  <h1 class="head">Aims of the Course</h1>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p5">5</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p5">From a Computer Science perspective this course
                            sought to implement and contextualize four current
                            goals and trends in Computer Science education.
                            Following is a brief description of each of these
                            goals with references for further reading.</div>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p6">6</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p6">(1) Project-Based Learning (“PBL”):</div>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p7">7</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p7">
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>Project-based courses are common in computing
                            education. As a method within the problem-based
                            learning toolkit, projects can be used at any stage
                            within a degree program to explore alternative and
                            often more complete solutions to a given problem
                            allowing the theory to emerge as necessary.
                             [<a class="ref" href="#richards2009">Richards 2009</a>]</p>
                     </blockquote>
                  </div>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p8">8</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p8">
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>Students who drop out from a course do not have the
                            opportunity to learn all the material and transfer
                            it. If students understand the usefulness of what
                            they are learning, they are less likely to give up.
                             [<a class="ref" href="#guzdial2010">Guzdial 2010</a>]</p>
                     </blockquote>
                  </div>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p9">9</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p9">There is a current trend in Computer Science pedagogy
                            to encourage "project-based
                                learning" (PBL) in place of "traditional"
                            one-off programming or development assignments.
                            [<a class="ref" href="#chang2010">Chang and Lee 2010</a>]; [<a class="ref" href="#gülbahar2006">Gülbahar and Tinmaz 2006</a>];
                            [<a class="ref" href="#richards2009">Richards 2009</a>]. We found that all of the technical
                            skills and technology infrastructure that we taught
                            could be related to the main project in this course,
                            which is the online digital archive. This approach
                            appeared to incentivize the students to tackle
                            topics outside of their areas of expertise as the
                            results were immediately apparent (e.g. the ability
                            to manipulate a variety of images of a manuscript
                            within the context of a webpage) and moved them
                            closer to their end goal of the course project.</div>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p10">10</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p10">(2) The Role of Web Development in Computer Science
                            Pedagogy:</div>
                        
                  <blockquote>
                     <p class="ptext">Web development can provide a rich context for
                            exploring computer science concepts and practicing
                            computational creativity. [<a class="ref" href="#park2011">Park and Wiedenbeck 2011</a>]</p>
                  </blockquote>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p11">11</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p11">Web development has become a serious area of study
                            for undergraduate Computer Science majors [<a class="ref" href="#adams2007">Adams 2007</a>]; [<a class="ref" href="#connolly2011">Connolly, 2011</a>]; [<a class="ref" href="#liu2011">Liu and Phelps 2011</a>]; [<a class="ref" href="#mendes2012">Mendes et al 2012</a>]; [<a class="ref" href="#schaub2009">Schaub 2009</a>] and for undergraduate
                            non-majors [<a class="ref" href="#gousie2006">Gousie 2006</a>]; [<a class="ref" href="#greenberg2012">Greenberg et al 2012</a>];
                            [<a class="ref" href="#guzdial2005">Guzdial and Forte 2005</a>]; [<a class="ref" href="#kurkovsky2007">Kurkovsky 2007</a>]. Web
                            development offers instructors and students both a
                            granular approach to teaching technologies by
                            focusing a lesson or assignment on a single
                            technology (e.g. xHTML/CSS; PHP; using Photoshop to
                            manipulate images, etc.) as well as the opportunity
                            to study and work with the many-faceted
                            technological structure of web implementation (e.g.
                            the underlying relationship between xHTML, CSS, PHP
                            and a database in the context of modifying and
                            manipulating a content management system (CMS)
                            site.) </div>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p12">12</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p12">(3) Inclusion and Computer Science Pedagogy:</div>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p13">13</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p13">Supporting a workforce that can create, not simply
                            consume, computing technology requires a shift in
                            pedagogy toward problem solving in a gender neutral,
                            culturally and ethnically diverse community.
                            [<a class="ref" href="#pulimood2008">Pulimood and Wolz 2008</a>].</div>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p14">14</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p14">There is an acute awareness within the Computer
                            Science pedagogy field that education in Computer
                            Science and technology must consciously and
                            deliberately address issues of inclusion so that
                            women and minority students as well as disabled
                            students should have full access and encouragement
                            to participate on a "level playing
                                field". As female
                            students are well represented in the discipline of
                            English, the issues of gender and computer
                            technology were particularly relevant for the
                            course. The recent research into inclusivity within
                            Computer Science education [<a class="ref" href="#guzdial2012">Guzdial et al 2012</a>];
                            [<a class="ref" href="#pulimood2008">Pulimood and Wolz 2008</a>]; [<a class="ref" href="#stephenson2007">Stephenson et al 2007</a>] helps
                            to inform practices and approaches to teaching
                            technology skills to Humanities students. Open
                            discussion of discomfort with technology appeared to
                            ameliorate some of the concern. Furthermore,
                            imposing a rule in classroom discussion that "there
                            is no such thing as a dumb question" and that
                            "web
                            technology is constantly evolving and the trick is
                            to learn how to frame the question" helped to
                            assuage the students’ fears.</div>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p15">15</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p15">(4) The Development of Computer Science Pedagogy
                            Within Inter-disciplinary and Cross-disciplinary
                            Areas of Education:</div>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p16">16</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p16">Computer science holds a unique position to craft
                            multidisciplinary curricula for the new generation
                            of faculty and students across the academy who
                            increasingly rely on computing for their
                            scholarship. [<a class="ref" href="#leblanc2010">LeBlanc et al 2010</a>]</div>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p17">17</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p17">Computer Science departments must continue to meet
                            the needs of other departments and collaborate both
                            on University pedagogy goals and with research
                            [<a class="ref" href="#bills2007">Bills and Canosa 2007</a>]; [<a class="ref" href="#leblanc2010">LeBlanc et al 2010</a>].
                            Teaching collaboration between Computer Science and
                            literature faculty aids the development of more
                            radically interdisciplinary courses, which can offer
                            something different from literature courses that use
                            technologically-enhanced learning or web development
                            courses that utilize literary texts. </div>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p18">18</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p18">Our course was structured so as to begin with
                            connected but distinct issues in literature and
                            technology that ran in tandem, but to work towards
                            the integration of the two sets of considerations.
                            This integration culminated in the final section of
                            the course on the Text Encoding Initiative (<a class="ref" href="http://www.tei-c.org/index.xml" onclick="window.open('http://www.tei-c.org/index.xml'); return false">http://www.tei-c.org/index.xml</a>). From
                            the perspective of the literature instructor, then,
                            the overall pedagogical aim was to provide a layer
                            of commentary on the course activities that
                            encouraged students to reflect on all the technical
                            decisions they made in building their sites as
                            themselves potentially acts of interpretation of the
                            text they were representing. Through looking at
                            recent debates around textual interpretation in
                            literary studies, it was possible to make connections
                            that enabled students to consider how their own
                            practice in digital reproduction might be
                            intersecting fundamentally and significantly with
                            issues of textuality. This goal was one of teaching
                            the students how to think in ways that confront the
                            deepest issues of interdisciplinarity, and to avoid
                            the natural compartmentalization of skill sets. We
                            maintained the specificity of the issues within each
                            disciplinary field while showing the points of
                            intersection by role-modeling debates between the
                            two teachers. With the main outcome of the course
                            being the online digital archive, we decided not to
                            ask the students to write a separate reflective
                            essay-commentary on their building of those sites,
                            but to ensure that this reflection was built into
                            the site through their layout, the choices they
                            made, and through the prose in their "About"
                            sections.</div>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p19">19</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p19">Also from a literary perspective, it was crucial to
                            the course that there was the potential not just for
                            a growth in technological skills informed by
                            considerations drawn from the humanities, but a
                            growth in awareness of textual features through
                            attending to the literature in a new way. In other
                            words, the act of digitization became within the
                            course a new way of being sensitive to the features
                            of the text for literary, critical, and interpretative
                            purposes. The potential for this process to work in
                            two disciplinary directions simultaneously was
                            particularly interesting pedagogically because the
                            students came to the course with varied levels of
                            expertise in technology and in literary study. The
                            humanities skills the students developed through the
                            course were those of the literary critic
                            (particularly in relation to textual materiality),
                            the literary-historical scholar, and the editor.
                            Depending on each student’s previous experience and
                            their comfort with literature and technology,
                            respectively, the opportunities were different, but
                            for every student the objective was a symbiotic
                            relationship between the two, with the digitization
                            process prompting new engagement with the texts they
                            had chosen, and for the resulting considerations to
                            then go on to inflect the way they used the
                            technology within their site. </div>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p20">20</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p20">While this article focuses around the collaboration
                            of the two professors who designed and taught the
                            course, it should be noted from the outset that the
                            course benefitted enormously from the involvement of
                            a broader team. The librarians at the Bobst Library,
                            and particularly those working within Fales
                            (Charlotte Priddle, Lisa Darms, and Amanda Watson),
                            provided a session for our students teaching them
                            how to use special collections and how to handle its
                            materials. Melitte Buchman from the Bobst Digital
                            Studio (<a class="ref" href="http://dlib.nyu.edu/dlts/" onclick="window.open('http://dlib.nyu.edu/dlts/'); return false">http://dlib.nyu.edu/dlts/</a>)
                            worked with our students both as a group and
                            individually to help them photograph their materials
                            and understand the principles and practices of
                            imaging. The Systems Group within the Courant
                            Institute of Mathematical Sciences (CIMS) provided
                            the technological resources required to host and
                            support the students’ projects. Working within this
                            broader term not only helped better support our
                            students but also offered something in return, as
                            our students provided the library with high
                            resolution tiff images of the materials they had
                            scanned.</div>
            
               </div>
            
               <div class="div div0">
                
                  <h1 class="head">The Course Syllabus and Structure: Technology</h1>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p21">21</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p21">This course met twice each week: once in a
                            traditional classroom lecture and discussion format;
                            and a second time in a multi-media lab for hands-on
                            work. Both instructors attended all of the lecture
                            classes; in addition, the Computer Science faculty
                            member provided lab sessions, and the English
                            faculty member offered consultation hours
                            immediately following each lab session (in practice,
                            there was much collaboration between the two
                            professors in each of these additional strands).</div>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p22">22</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p22">Every student was given an account on a production
                            webserver (<a class="ref" href="http://cims.nyu.edu/webapps/content/systems/resources/i6" onclick="window.open('http://cims.nyu.edu/webapps/content/systems/resources/i6'); return false">http://cims.nyu.edu/webapps/content/systems/resources/i6</a>). The Courant Institute provides two servers
                            dedicated to teaching purposes that are used
                            throughout the Computer Science department: a
                            web-server for students to host their sites and a
                            database server running MySQL so that students learn
                            to create and manage their own databases. Students
                            also worked in the Digital Studio (<a class="ref" href="http://nyu.libguides.com/digitalstudio" onclick="window.open('http://nyu.libguides.com/digitalstudio'); return false">http://nyu.libguides.com/digitalstudio</a>) and ITS Multi-media lab which provided scanning
                            equipment and appropriate software for image
                            manipulation and web development.</div>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p23">23</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p23">The course was divided into four units. A list of the
                            technical skills which were taught in each unit is
                            followed by an overview of the pedagogical
                            practices. The first three units each entailed a
                            project-based assignment which is described below as
                            well.</div>
                
               </div>
            
               <div class="div div0">
                        
                  <h1 class="head">Unit I - Basic web development skills: </h1>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p24">24</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p24">In this unit of the course, we covered skills and
                            topics typically taught in a standard introductory
                            course to web design. These topics include:</div>
                        
                  <div class="ptext">
                     <ul class="list">
                        <li class="item">Mark-up languages: Students were introduced to
                                mark-up languages using HTML5 and CSS3 for
                                rendering basic webpages.
                           </li>
                        <li class="item">Working with images: Students learned to scan
                                objects to specification; with discussion on
                                image resolution and image file types (.tiff,
                                .psd, .jpg, and .gif in particular) in order to
                                understand how to best implement the process
                                from scanning a manuscript through rendering
                                that image for web viewing at appropriate sizes
                                and resolution. Melitte Buchman, the Digital
                                Content Manager at NYU’s Division of Libraries,
                                provided a guest lecture for the class on
                                meta-data standards for image files as well as
                                on accepted scholarly standards for images used
                                for scholarly purposes. </li>
                        <li class="item">File management skills for working on a Unix
                                web server: Students learned to upload files for
                                publication; manage file folders; download
                                files; assess file sizes and permissions; set up
                                .htaccess files to restrict access to portions
                                of their sites when appropriate; and other file
                                management skills. </li>
                     </ul>
                  </div>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p25">25</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p25">The project assignment for this unit consisted of a
                            website of a minimum of two pages rendered in HTML5
                            and CSS3 to describe an author of the student’s
                            choice and publish two or three selections of his or
                            her work.</div>
            
               </div>
            
               <div class="div div0">
                        
                  <h1 class="head">Unit II - Content Management System (CMS)</h1>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p26">26</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p26">In this unit of the course, each student installed
                            his/her own WordPress (<a class="ref" href="http://wordpress.org/" onclick="window.open('http://wordpress.org/'); return false">http://wordpress.org</a>) site to the
                            teaching webserver. The Computer Science faculty
                            member, in consultation with the English Department,
                            decided to use WordPress in this case as Omeka was
                            not supported on the server we used and we believed
                            Drupal is too complex for an introductory class
                            taught within one semester for this student
                            population. As each student installed his or her own
                            WordPress site, they had the opportunity to
                            learn aboutWordPress as an example of a CMS and will
                            be able to carry this knowledge to future CMS
                            projects.</div>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p27">27</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p27">Specific topics in this unit included:</div>
                        
                  <div class="ptext">
                     <ul class="list">
                        <li class="item">Themes (<a class="ref" href="http://wordpress.org/themes/" onclick="window.open('http://wordpress.org/themes/'); return false">http://wordpress.org/themes/</a>) and
                                child-themes (<a class="ref" href="http://codex.wordpress.org/Child_Themes" onclick="window.open('http://codex.wordpress.org/Child_Themes'); return false">http://codex.wordpress.org/Child_Themes</a>) for customization: Each student was expected
                                to select and install a WordPress theme of his
                                or her choice based on the content needs of the
                                site. In addition, each student was required to
                                create a child-theme for further customization;
                                one result is that none of the original themes
                                were recognizable in the final sites.</li>
                        <li class="item">The students explored additional topics in
                                xHTML and CSS to facilitate their site
                                development including the debugging process such
                                as with Firefox Firebug (<a class="ref" href="https://getfirebug.com/" onclick="window.open('https://getfirebug.com/'); return false">https://getfirebug.com/</a>);
                                implementing external style sheets such as
                                Google Fonts (<a class="ref" href="https://www.google.com/fonts" onclick="window.open('https://www.google.com/fonts'); return false">https://www.google.com/fonts</a>) and
                                understanding and implementing responsive design
                                (the way that a site might change configuration
                                depending on whether the user is viewing the
                                site on a desktop, tablet or mobile phone for
                                example).</li>
                        <li class="item">We taught a brief introduction to PHP where all
                                students were required to modify the source code
                                in at least one PHP script (e.g. all students
                                were required to modify the default footnote to
                                credit the Fales Archives for their materials;
                                this typically required a PHP script
                                modification.)</li>
                        <li class="item">A CMS uses a database “behind the scenes”:
                                Students were introduced to MySQL during
                                lectures. The students were not required to make
                                changes to their data within MySQL but in
                                several instances they required assistance from
                                the Computer Science instructor to do so and
                                these events resulted in positive learning
                                experiences for the class.</li>
                        <li class="item">Throughout this unit, we discussed the
                                underlying structure of a CMS and at the end of
                                this unit, we discussed the differences and
                                similarities among the most commonly used CMS’
                                in the Digital Humanities (WordPress, Drupal and
                                Omeka; with a brief explanation of Django). We
                                also discussed the role of JavaScript in a CMS
                                but the students did not study or modify
                                JavaScript in this project.</li>
                     </ul>
                  </div>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p28">28</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p28">The assignment for this unit of the course consisted
                            of their first draft of an online digital archive
                            based on primary source materials; content included
                            text and images.</div>
            
               </div>
            
               <div class="div div0">
                        
                  <h1 class="head">Unit III: – XML and the Text Encoding Initiative
                        </h1>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p29">29</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p29">Based on the principle in Computer Science pedagogy
                            of building skills on a strong foundation, we
                            introduced XML in the final development unit of the
                            course. In this unit of the course, we sought to
                            build on the students’ understanding and experience
                            with HTML5 as a mark-up language in order to
                            contextualize and introduce XML [<a class="ref" href="#mackellar2012">MacKellar 2012</a>];
                            [<a class="ref" href="#patterson2005">Paterson et al 2005</a>] in general and the TEI
                            application of XML in particular. </div>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p30">30</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p30">Students were introduced to the syntax and structure
                            of XML as it is used in its narrative form for
                            descriptive meta-data; students in this course did
                            not use XML to generate stand-alone datasets. There
                            are significant differences between XML and HTML;
                            the significantly greater flexibility of XML was
                            presented to the students as a means to better
                            annotate and analyze their literary texts. Students
                            already understood that HTML and CSS separate the
                            content of a text from the infinite variety of
                            possible output formats. In this course, we
                            discussed XML implementation to further describe and
                            define the underlying literary structure of a text
                            (e.g. a play consists of acts; and each act may
                            consist of one or more scenes while a novel
                            containing chapters would be encoded differently in
                            order to capture the underlying structure of prose).
                            We further introduced the flexibility and
                            variability available in XML languages to capture
                            meta-data; specifically using XML tags standardized
                            in the literary scholarly community through the
                            international efforts of the TEI Consortium and
                            related projects. The two instructors worked closely
                            together to pick a series of examples for the first
                            lectures on TEI/XML in order for the students to
                            make the transition and see the value of XML over
                            plain text or HTML.</div>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p31">31</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p31">For web presentation of the TEI documents to
                            accompany their websites, students were offered the
                            choice to use CSS or TEI-Boilerplate (<a class="ref" href="http://dcl.slis.indiana.edu/teibp/index.html" onclick="window.open('http://dcl.slis.indiana.edu/teibp/index.html'); return false">http://dcl.slis.indiana.edu/teibp/index.html</a>). XSLT was not taught formally in this class due
                            to the concern that this is a more advanced topic
                            which could intimidate students at this level,
                            especially in light of the complex literary texts
                            that they selected. However, the Computer Science
                            instructor introduced XSLT briefly at this time in
                            the course so that the students would understand the
                            importance of it in web publishing and its wide
                            usage in the TEI community. Several students
                            expressed an interest in XSLT workshops such as
                            those conducted by the Women Writers Project (<a class="ref" href="http://www.wwp.northeastern.edu/outreach/seminars/" onclick="window.open('http://www.wwp.northeastern.edu/outreach/seminars/'); return false">http://www.wwp.northeastern.edu/outreach/seminars/</a>).</div>
            
               </div>
            
               <div class="div div0">
                        
                  <h1 class="head">Unit IV: Site Preservation</h1>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p32">32</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p32">Preservation is a very important topic with respect
                            to digital archives from both a literary and a
                            technical perspective. In the final class, we
                            discussed technological aspects of the students’
                            sites which would require modification for permanent
                            online publication; and how to render a finished CMS
                            site into a static HTML/CSS site for permanent
                            publication (this discussion centered on a plug-in
                            currently available at <a class="ref" href="http://wordpress.org/plugins/static-html-output-plugin/" onclick="window.open('http://wordpress.org/plugins/static-html-output-plugin/'); return false">http://wordpress.org/plugins/static-html-output-plugin/</a>. Note that this plug-in required modification by
                            the instructor in order for the students to use it.).
                            The students understood that such a transition would
                            eliminate any future issues of upgrades to PHP
                            running on the webserver in general and to future
                            versions of WordPress in particular; as well as the
                            value of rendering the site easier for the Systems
                            administrators to support as MySQL would no longer
                            be needed to keep their sites running after such a
                            transition. </div>
            
               </div>
            
               <div class="div div0">
            
                  <h1 class="head">The Course Syllabus and Structure:
                            Literature</h1>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p33">33</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p33">Interwoven with this technology syllabus was a set of
                            considerations led by the literature professor. This
                            process began at the start of the semester through a
                            discussion about why we might want to digitize texts
                            and what might be gained; what our priorities should
                            be in deciding which texts to digitize; which texts
                            might be most at risk of being lost to us or
                            inaccessible if not digitized; and what might be the
                            consequences of digitizing text. This class
                            discussion generated a humanities agenda (of aims
                            and concerns) to which we returned throughout the
                            course in relation to our practice. The following
                            two weeks were devoted to analyzing existing online
                            literary archives: first a few chosen for collective
                            group attention,<a class="noteRef" href="#d0e502">[1]</a> and
                            then those chosen by the students which they
                            analyzed in ten minute presentations to the class.
                            Students were given a list of criteria for the
                            scholarly evaluation of such sites, but also asked
                            to think more generally about what the online
                            presentation of the material adds (what it might
                            enable the user to do with the text that they
                            couldn’t otherwise do) and how it might change our
                            reading of the material presented. It is through
                            this discussion that one of the key practices of the
                            course, from a humanities perspective, was
                            introduced: analyzing how site-building and
                            presentational decisions are also in key part
                            interpretative decisions that determine how the
                            material is read. The lessons learned from this
                            analysis fed into their own project
                            development in various ways, particularly in
                            relation to their design of site architecture and
                            navigations. For one student working with a
                            nineteenth-century manuscript of a novella, for
                            example, a key opportunity arose from the author’s
                            practice of dating his work on the manuscript. The
                            student designed menu options that allowed the user
                            to access the manuscript according either to date of
                            composition or chapter structure. This enabled the
                            correlation of the work the author was doing on the
                            manuscript on a particular day with the concerns he
                            expressed in letters written on or around the same
                            day.</div>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p34">34</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p34">For the literary component of this first section of
                            the course, essays such as Kenneth M. Price’s piece
                            on "Electronic Scholarly Editions" were used to
                            introduce many of the key concerns [<a class="ref" href="#price2013">Price 2013</a>].
                            However, students were also asked to engage with
                            thoughts about the practice of textual editing more
                            generally and to consider the kinds of benefits the
                            online environment might offer over the traditional
                            paper-based environment. The issues discussed here
                            ranged from the ability to rectify mistakes
                            relatively easily in digital editions as opposed to
                            runs of printed texts, to the kind of high-level
                            interactivity and hypertextuality that online
                            archives might offer. </div>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p35">35</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p35">Teaching the students about metadata was a crucial
                            part of the first half of this course and the topic
                            was introduced, from the literary-studies
                            perspective, through the scholarly debate around
                            textual materiality. The technical information about
                            metadata standards was provided through the online
                            pamphlet — "Understanding
                                Metadata" – published by
                            the National Information Standards Organization
                            (<a class="ref" href="http://www.niso.org/publications/press/UnderstandingMetadata.pdf" onclick="window.open('http://www.niso.org/publications/press/UnderstandingMetadata.pdf'); return false">http://www.niso.org/publications/press/UnderstandingMetadata.pdf</a>),
                            but that was really secondary to getting students to
                            first consider <em class="emph">why</em> it might
                            be important to record and represent certain types
                            of information about the texts they were digitizing,
                            and <em class="emph">what</em> they would want to
                            record in order to capture various different aspects
                            of the textual object. To bring this issue alive
                            from the perspective of literary scholarship, the
                            students were given some relevant literary
                            scholarship in advance of the class. For example,
                            Nicholas Frankel has written about the significance
                            of reading text within the context of the book as a
                            material object, using as his example Oscar Wilde’s
                                <cite class="title italic">Poems</cite> – a beautiful and
                            elaborately-designed book it was possible to show
                            them in the University’s special collections the
                            following week [<a class="ref" href="#frankel2000">Frankel 2000</a>]. This scholarly work
                            gave an agenda to thinking about textual materiality
                            and provided a powerful example of the kinds of
                            interests humanities researchers might have in a
                            book’s extra-textual features, and how those
                            features might be considered necessary for the
                            interpretation of a text. For the class itself, the
                            literature professor brought in some examples of
                            books that raised interesting issues of materiality,
                            and discussed with the students which aspects they
                            would want to represent in a digital rendition and
                            how they would go about giving that information in
                            the form of metadata. These examples included not
                            only texts that are elaborate or unusual in their
                            material instantiation but, for example, a fairly
                            plain mid-twentieth-century book that had an old
                            photo tucked inside the front cover; it was not
                            clear the photo had any relevance to the book other
                            than through the life of a previous owner, and the
                            students were asked to discuss what they would do
                            with it in their digitization process. The students
                            were also asked to bring in any textual-object of
                            their choice and talk briefly — and in light of the
                            kinds of issues they had seen explored in the set
                            reading — about what and how they would want to
                            represent it in addition to its text. </div>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p36">36</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p36">The benefit of approaching the issue of metadata
                            through literary scholarship around textual
                            materiality was that it enabled a much deeper
                            engagement with the issues of creating a digital
                            representation. These would not have emerged had we
                            simply instructed the students of the need to
                            record, for example, the particularities of the
                            place, date, and publication of the particular
                            edition they were digitizing, or the physical
                            location and call number of the manuscript they
                            might be working with. The discussion around the
                            importance of issues of materiality to the
                            interpretation of text brought to light all kinds of
                            other aspects of the physical text that might be
                            important in representing it in a digital format:
                            both through metadata and through the photographs
                            and scans they were to create. For example, we
                            discussed the importance of giving the online reader
                            images of the cover and front-pages and end-pages of
                            a text, and considered the ways in which sites that
                            had not done so might limit the questions scholars
                            could ask of the texts they represent. In light of
                            recent scholarship on the history of paper, we also
                            considered the potential importance of giving
                            information such as the type and weight of paper
                            used as part of the metadata, and the significance
                            of such information to certain kinds of scholarly
                            questions (see [<a class="ref" href="#price2012">Price 2012</a>]. </div>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p37">37</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p37">Issues of materiality central to the course were
                            given an interesting twist through one student’s
                            focus on contemporary "zines". Often created by hand
                            rather than on a computer, and exploiting a rawness
                            that appeared to oppose the aesthetics of new
                            technologies, the students were encouraged to think
                            about how these pieces posed interesting
                            theoretical, and sometimes practical, questions for
                            the process of digitization. One zine in particular,
                            which was folded in such a way as to give the
                            potential for many different views of its content
                            depending on how it was unfolded, exploited the
                            three-dimensional possibilities of paper in space.
                            Although with enough separate images from different
                            angles (or within a video or animation), these
                            possibilities could be captured and uploaded to the
                            digital archive, the zine was clearly designed to
                            challenge the two-dimensional textuality of both the
                            traditional codex technology and digital textuality.
                            The introduction of literary-theoretical frames for
                            thinking about the insistent materiality of these
                            items led the student to write to their authors with
                            questions both about their intentions and to ask
                            permission to digitize the zines. The replies were
                            often revealing of a reaction against digital
                            culture and can be summarized with reference to the
                            "8 ball" collective website, where they insist on
                            "MORE ZINING, LESS BLOGGING"
                            (<a class="ref" href="http://8ballzinefair.com/ABOUT" onclick="window.open('http://8ballzinefair.com/ABOUT'); return false">http://8ballzinefair.com/ABOUT</a>).</div>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p38">38</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p38">This discussion about the material instantiation of
                            text (in relation to very varied examples from the
                            nineteenth to the twenty-first century) led by the
                            literature professor was part of the preparation for
                            students to go into the university library’s special
                            collections department to choose the materials they
                            wanted to digitize. Attending a session organized by
                            the library staff, the students learned about the
                            collection, and how to handle its materials. The
                            library staff also covered copyright issues that
                            continued to play an important role in class
                            discussions throughout the course as permissions
                            were clarified, sought and granted. The following
                            weeks of the course focused, from the literature
                            perspective, on helping the students to choose their
                            texts; and culminated in using one of the classes
                            to present their materials and discuss them
                            with the other students in the class. At the
                            presentation the students were asked to give a
                            rationale for their choices, including thoughts on
                            the textual, critical/historical and technical
                            significance of their selection. This discussion, in
                            a roundtable format, was particularly useful because
                            the students had chosen very different kinds of
                            materials to digitize: sharing their work with each
                            other enabled them to learn from the very different
                            challenges they were each facing, and to broaden
                            their understanding beyond the issues their own
                            materials posed. Over the next couple of weeks, when
                            the class time was devoted primarily to the
                            technical issues of building their sites, it was
                            possible to ensure the "literary" considerations
                            stayed with them by asking them all the time to
                            think about and develop that connection between the
                            building decisions they were making in their
                            archives and the issues of textuality and
                            materiality introduced earlier. This was something
                            the literature professor took up with students
                            particularly during the lab sessions when there was
                            the opportunity to address these issues individually
                            and to encourage them to think about the particular
                            problems and possibilities their own materials
                            offered. </div>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p39">39</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p39">We brought all of this back into class again in week
                            eight, when almost the whole session was devoted to
                            another literature-led roundtable with each student
                            presenting their site under construction and
                            explaining in ten minutes why they had chosen the
                            proposed site architecture and to give a rationale,
                            from a literary and scholarly perspective, for the
                            technical choices they had made. They were asked to
                            consider  not just how their materials could
                            best be presented, but also who their intended
                            audience was and how a desire to be useful and
                            relevant to a broad audience might inflect the
                            design of their sites. At this point the students
                            were asked to consider what kind of interest their
                            texts might hold within current scholarly fields of
                            enquiry and how to connect with and aid those users,
                            but also how they might make their sites sustainable
                            in a literary, rather than a technological sense, by
                            keeping their materials open as far as possible to
                            the kinds of questions future users might want to
                            ask of them that we cannot now necessarily predict.
                            As an example, introducing archives that had
                            not digitized the advertisements at the back of the
                            nineteenth-century periodicals they represented, we
                            discussed how such materials were now considered of
                            great interest to scholars both in their own right
                            and as context for the articles that had been
                            digitized. All the students reported making changes
                            to their sites as a result of the reflective process
                            they undertook in presenting their rationale
                            to others. Listening to each others’ presentations
                            and discussing them afterwards also helped
                            significantly in sharing good practice and
                            introducing new possibilities for each project. At
                            the end of each presentation the student was asked
                            what they might enable through their digitization of
                            the text that could not be done before. Here they
                            were asked to go beyond the more obvious answers
                            that related to preservation and access to think
                            about how their digitization strategy enabled the
                            texts to ask new questions of themselves; the
                            ensuing discussion was particularly formative for
                            shaping the next phase of site building the students
                            undertook in the course.</div>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p40">40</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p40">The second half of this session was devoted to a
                            round-up of the challenges students were facing with
                            their projects from a literary, rather than
                            technological, perspective. The agenda here was
                            determined in key part by the problems, and
                            solutions, that had arisen with students
                            individually in the lab sessions (which often
                            highlighted more general issues they should all
                            consider). The agenda included a discussion of
                            issues around the principles of manuscript
                            transcription. Here the students were invited to
                            consider the well-worked out transcription statement
                            represented in a site such as the Bentham letters
                            (given there in full to aid crowd-sourced
                            transcription) and how it might help them develop
                            principles for their own transcription
                            (<a class="ref" href="http://blogs.ucl.ac.uk/transcribe-bentham/" onclick="window.open('http://blogs.ucl.ac.uk/transcribe-bentham/'); return false">http://blogs.ucl.ac.uk/transcribe-bentham/</a>).
                            Editorial experience was also used to encourage the
                            students to think about the significance of
                            recording uncertainty, introducing the need to
                            balance a natural desire for definitive and
                            interpretative transcriptions with a strategy that
                            left open possibilities for other meanings that
                            might become relevant in the future. Also raised
                            here was the general, and related, issue of fidelity
                            versus clarity/usability, and clutter versus
                            functionality, to help the students think about the
                            challenges they were all facing in deciding how much
                            detail to present and how many different functions
                            to build into their sites. The possibility of
                            offering different views of the material, so a
                            reader could choose either a simple or more complex
                            view and functionality, was a particularly useful
                            point around which the instructors could role-model
                            the interplay of technical and scholarly
                            considerations. Another major topic at this point
                            was the use of visualization and mapping to enable
                            the students to present data in new ways. With one
                            student using a map to locate manuscripts
                            geographically, we were able to introduce the idea
                            of using visualizing more generally in other,
                            non-geographical, ways to help get more out of their
                            data. For example, another student had been
                            wondering which of the many and varied published
                            editions of her novella to provide alongside the
                            manuscript version she was digitizing; one solution
                            discussed with her was to use the software tool
                            Juxta (<a class="ref" href="http://www.juxtasoftware.org/" onclick="window.open('http://www.juxtasoftware.org/'); return false">http://www.juxtasoftware.org/</a>) to show the
                            relationship between the manuscript and various
                            different published editions, showing visually the
                            areas of greatest similarly and difference between
                            them. </div>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p41">41</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p41">This process of reflecting on the literary issues at
                            stake in their building procedures ended with the
                            students being asked to imagine what they might
                            enable their users to do with their materials in an
                            ideal world — and what the literary or scholarly
                            value of those digital experiments might be. This
                            was the basis for a discussion of how the course
                            instructors might be able to help the students
                            implement some of those ideas in a realistic form
                            within the time and resources available. For
                            example, a student who was interested in large-scale
                            crowd-sourced transcription created a game-inspired
                            transcription quiz in the form of a WordPress blog.
                            She used this to address some of the challenges of
                            legibility posed by the author’s hand-written
                            marginal comments in the type-written manuscript she
                            was digitizing. Another student who was digitizing
                            an archive of mid-twentieth-century letters written from New York City plotted the addresses
                            from which they were sent on a historically accurate
                            map of the city. She used KML (a mark-up language
                            based on XML for use with Google Maps) to identify
                            the geographical positions, and then superimposed a
                            map from the archives of the New York Public Library
                            over the Google map to make the mapping historically
                            relevant. Adding a geographical component to her
                            work enabled her to analyze the importance of the
                            location of writing to its content — a process that
                            revealed interesting connections.</div>
            
               </div>
            
               <div class="div div0">
                        
                  <h1 class="head">Text Encoding: Further
                                Integrating Technological and Literary
                                Considerations </h1>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p42">42</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p42">The course culminated in teaching encoding to the
                            students so that they could add a further layer of
                            information to their sites, experimenting with what
                            the TEI might be able to offer their projects. First
                            we used the "The Red Wheelbarrow" by William Carlos
                            Williams in order to introduce mark-up of basic
                            metadata and poetic structure from a technical
                            perspective. Then we turned to a passage from <cite class="title italic">Hamlet</cite> and a chapter from
                            <cite class="title italic">Huckleberry Finn</cite> to teach the
                            TEI conventions for encoding drama and prose. We
                            taught this collaboratively, going through the
                            literary passages with the students identifying
                            which features one might want to encode, and showing
                            how those features would be rendered in the XML. The
                            Shakespeare example enabled us initially to
                            introduce the idea of the TEI header and the kind of
                            metadata that could be recorded there: both in
                            relation to the creation of the electronic edition,
                            and in relation to the specificities of the edition
                            drawn on for digitization. It also enabled us to
                            show some of the key tags and attributes for working
                            with dramatic text. Chapter twenty-one from the Mark
                            Twain novel was chosen to enable a more complex
                            engagement with TEI through its playfulness with
                            genre: here the characters engage in a muddled and
                            half-remembered enactment of a Shakespeare play. The
                            play-acting within the text enabled us to show how
                            one might mix prose and drama tags to render the
                            text in interesting and useful ways. In addition,
                            the text invited a series of notes in the encoding
                            disentangling the lines from different Shakespeare
                            plays that were muddled together in a single
                            soliloquy. The chapter also has instances of
                            southern dialect that could be translated in the
                            text encoding (thus rendering it searchable in
                            standard English), and other textual features (such
                            as a playbill centered in the middle of a page) that
                            raised interesting questions about encoding
                            practice. </div>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p43">43</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p43">Following on from this class teaching the language of
                            the TEI, the literature faculty member led another
                            session focusing on the literary and critical
                            significance of encoding. The chapter <cite class="title italic">The Text Encoding
                                Initiative and the Study of Literature</cite> by James
                            Cummings provided a good starting point for the students to
                            think about the history of the initiative and its
                            more theoretical and critical implications [<a class="ref" href="#cummings2013">Cummings 2013</a>]. The students had read this chapter in advance
                            of the class, and had also prepared their own notes
                            towards the encoding of the first textual example we
                            looked at in this session: Shakespeare’s Sonnet no.
                            116. Working through the sonnet with them gave a
                            chance to think about a different genre through TEI.
                            Starting with a literary critical reading of the
                            sonnet, the students were asked to think about the
                            rhyme scheme and meter. Noting the possibility of
                            rendering the overall meter and rhyme scheme in the
                            header, we also discussed, for example, the
                            implications of the fact that the rhyme scheme does
                            not in fact appear to comply to this scheme in
                            modern English, and how we might reflect on that in
                            the TEI. Similarly the opening lines of the poem
                            (which invoke the liturgy of the marriage ceremony)
                            are not in the standard iambic meter, and this
                            enabled us to discuss what kind of metrical mark-up
                            and interpretation might be noted through the TEI.
                            The goal here was to begin to think about the
                            variety of purposes for which encoding might be
                            used, and to start to show the variety of ways one
                            can note a particular feature of the text through
                            the TEI depending on what one wants to achieve. </div>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p44">44</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p44">Having worked through the sonnet in detail, we then
                            gave them the poem "Love Sonnet" by John Updike and
                            asked them how they would encode it [<a class="ref" href="#updike1969">Updike 1969</a>, 66]. The poem has
                            one complete first line ("In
                            Love’s rubber armor I come to you"’) but the
                            subsequent thirteen "lines" of the sonnet are
                            indicated purely by a letter marking the position on
                            the page where each line would end. The letter given
                            to mark each line ending crucially also represents
                            the strict rhyme scheme of the sonnet. From a
                            technological perspective, the aim of this exercise
                            was to get the student to produce an XML encoding,
                            but from a literary perspective it was also to ask
                            students to think about the act of encoding and to
                            recognize the poem as itself in some ways a
                            challenge to some of the structuralist assumptions
                            upon which TEI is founded. The poem is a post-modern
                            parody of the conventional nature of love poetry,
                            gesturing towards the generic, iterable and
                            predictable nature of the romantic sonnet. As such,
                            the poem is a gesture towards a sonnet rather than a
                            sonnet itself, and in this way it raises questions
                            about the kinds of classifications on which encoding
                            is based. The poem has fourteen lines, and the rhyme
                            scheme one would expect from a Shakespearian sonnet,
                            but does that make it a sonnet, and should it be
                            identified in that way in the TEI? What happens if
                            we try to encode this poem in the way we tagged the
                            Shakespeare sonnet? What questions does this ask of
                            the poem, and what might it miss or misrepresent? To
                            encode this poem as a sonnet is to explain its own
                            joke in a rather heavy-handed way, but the joke is
                            also in some sense on the process of encoding, which
                            the playfulness of the poem seems to evade. Looking
                            at this poem with the students aimed, then, to
                            explore and question in practice some of the issues
                            that Jerome McGann identified when he wrote that
                            because the TEI "treats the humanities corpus –
                            typically works of imagination – as informational
                            structures, it ipso facto violates some of the most
                            basic reading practices of the humanities community,
                            scholarly as well as popular" [<a class="ref" href="#mcgann2001">McGann 2001</a>, 139].
                            Overall, then, the seminar introduced a theoretical
                            engagement with the TEI as well as teaching students
                            how to use the XML. </div>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p45">45</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p45">It was in light of this reflective engagement with
                            the TEI — on its possible limitations and problems
                            as well as its benefits — that we asked the students
                            to consider TEI in relation to their own projects.
                            The key question was what problems could TEI solve
                            for them, and what could it offer the user of the
                            site that was currently not otherwise possible. The
                            work we did in class on encoding various genres of
                            literary text complemented the work we did with the
                            students in the lab session which focused primarily
                            around their own project work with manuscripts. One
                            key area for discussion here was the potential for
                            the TEI to render searchable the textual-content
                            captured and presented primarily through images. The
                            students’ work with hand-written manuscripts
                            presented particularly interesting possibilities
                            here, in relation to providing options for the
                            interpretation of complex and problematic script,
                            and for presenting issues of manuscript materiality.
                            For example, a project digitizing nineteenth-century
                            hand-written letters, in which additions were often
                            placed in the gaps on the page, prompted class
                            debate on how best to render this text and useful
                            discussion about the complementarity of manuscript
                            image and text encoding. In addition to
                            transcription, the students also used the TEI to
                            note additional contextual information as well as
                            the usual metadata. For example, the student who
                            digitized letters written from various locations in
                            New York City used the TEI to encode the
                            geographical data. Another used the TEI to add
                            information about the hand-drawn images that
                            appeared in her text, thus enabling a further
                            explanatory and interpretative commentary that
                            altered the way the text would be read.</div>
            
               </div>
            
               <div class="div div0">
                        
                  <h1 class="head">Assessment</h1>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p46">46</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p46">The structure of the assessment reflected the
                            structure of the course more generally in that we
                            began with smaller separate technical and literary
                            assignments and then brought the two together in the
                            main project. The first two assignments (building a
                            small website for the purposes of studying HTML and
                            CSS; and evaluating existing on-line text-archive
                            sites) were assessed by the Computer Science and
                            English faculty members respectively. The final
                            online digital archive and the TEI-encoded literary
                            texts were assessed by the two faculty members
                            together. The course ended with the students
                            formally presenting their sites to the group for the
                            final assessment in order to maintain the group
                            dynamic and the sense of peer-sharing which had been
                            so important throughout the course.</div>
            
               </div>
            
               <div class="div div0"> 
                        
                  <h1 class="head">Conclusions</h1>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p47">47</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p47">Just as the Digital Humanities is an emerging field,
                            so is the pedagogy associated with it. Case studies
                            such as those described in <cite class="title italic">Digital
                                Humanities Pedagogy: Practices, Principles, and
                                Politics</cite> [<a class="ref" href="#hirsch2012">Hirsch 2012</a>] show a variety of pedagogical goals both
                            within and between different disciplinary areas in
                            the Humanities. Lists of competencies such as those
                            cited in <cite class="title italic">Specification 3</cite>
                                in <cite class="title italic">Digital_Humanities</cite>
                            [<a class="ref" href="#burdick2012">Burdick et al 2012</a>, 132–133] offer a different
                            approach: documenting specific technical skills
                            required for humanities students and scholars to
                            successfully create and implement computational and
                            digitally-based research and publications. Our
                            collaborative approach — of building on principles
                            of Computer Science pedagogy in combination with
                            teaching principles of digital literary scholarship —
                            aimed to provide our students with the best of
                            both worlds.</div>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p48">48</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p48">The principles of our collaboration might be
                            summarized under four points. The first being the
                            preparation we did before the course: planning how
                            we would interconnect the concerns of our respective
                            disciplines conceptually and practically in
                            relation to the structure of each class. The second
                            being the weekly meetings we had to monitor and
                            adjust the course content and pedagogical approach.
                            The third category relates to the differences in
                            disciplinary teaching methods. Our collaboration
                            involved an integration, or alternation, of the
                            seminar — or roundtable — discursive style of the
                            humanities with the more lecture-driven style of
                            Computer Science complemented with lab sessions.
                            Fourth, and finally, we sought to
                            role-model interdisciplinary collaboration in various
                            ways throughout the class, showing the students that
                            the same question might have two different answers:
                            one technical and one from a scholarly humanities
                            perspective; we then pursued the connections through
                            discussion with the class, and through discussion
                            with each other in front of the class. While at the
                            start of the course we presented the introductory
                            technological skills and the key humanities
                            questions separately, the goal was to achieve
                            convergence of these perspectives over the length of
                            the course by teaching the students to see every
                            technical decision they made in building their sites
                            as an interpretative gesture (and to see their
                            interpretative and critical analyses as having a
                            technical embodiment). </div>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p49">49</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p49">Various problems and challenges arose as we taught
                            the course. For example, the imaging of the primary
                            materials occurred early on in the semester and
                            generated a great deal of enthusiasm that resulted
                            in students imaging more material than they could
                            reasonably work with; in the future we would ask
                            students to think more carefully at this stage to
                            limit the focus and give more scope for the
                            qualitative rather than quantitative work. We also
                            ran into problems with the ever-changing
                            technological environment. For example, Google was
                            phasing out support for KML, which required a new
                            solution to be found for one student’s mapping work;
                            and TEI-Boilerplate turned out to serve our purposes
                            less well than expected in the CMS environment. In
                            terms of pedagogical approaches, we adapted the
                            course as it progressed to fit the needs of the
                            students; in particular, we worked to build in
                            greater opportunities for discussion and sharing information between the students and their
                            respective projects. In addition, once we began
                            working with the students on their individual
                            projects, we decided to use the particular
                            challenges they were facing with their materials as
                            our examples in the class lectures. </div>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p50">50</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p50">We have engaged with other departments to see how the
                            course might be modified to become suitable for a
                            broader range of humanities students. Our initial
                            assessment suggests there would be ways to develop
                            the course to cater to students from a range of
                            disciplines in Literature and History. For example,
                            introducing EAD (Encoded Archival Description: <a class="ref" href="http://www.loc.gov/ead/" onclick="window.open('http://www.loc.gov/ead/'); return false">http://www.loc.gov/ead/</a>) along with
                            TEI as examples of XML languages would be useful for
                            history students and complement work done by
                            literature students and history students using TEI
                            with manuscripts and documents. The addition of an
                            historian to our teaching team would be essential in
                            enabling us to expand our interdisciplinary
                            conceptualization and theorization of the online
                            archive in conjunction with this expanded
                            technological syllabus. Having taught the course
                            once we are also considering the following changes
                            for the second iteration: the addition of a lecture
                            on XSLT formatting the TEI examples used earlier in
                            the class; and the addition of more reading and
                            discussion on the theory of TEI.</div>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p51">51</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p51">Finally, we have found that teaching collaboratively
                            enabled us to think about new research practices.
                            This connection has not always been obvious:</div>
                        
                  <blockquote>
                     <p class="ptext">From the outset, it was clear that teaching together
                            in connected courses would be good for our students.
                            What was not so clear was how good it would be for
                            the faculty’s professional development and research
                            output.  [<a class="ref" href="#leblanc2010">LeBlanc et al 2010</a>]</p>
                  </blockquote>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p52">52</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p52">Yet, as we worked together, we better appreciated the
                            overlay of our fields of study, and ideas for new
                            research collaborations emerged. Digital
                            Humanities is an area in which collaboration can be
                            particularly valuable to ensure a depth and breadth
                            of both technical and conceptual knowledge, and
                            through our collaboration we felt able to explore
                            profound methodological intersections between the
                            fields of technology and the humanities. </div>
            
               </div>
            
               <div class="div div0">
                        
                  <h1 class="head">Appendix I: Course Description and Syllabus</h1>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p53">53</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p53">(<a class="ref" href="http://cs.nyu.edu/courses/fall13/ENGL-GA.2971-001/DT_index_fa13.php" onclick="window.open('http://cs.nyu.edu/courses/fall13/ENGL-GA.2971-001/DT_index_fa13.php'); return false">http://cs.nyu.edu/courses/fall13/ENGL-GA.2971-001/DT_index_fa13.php</a>)</div>
                        
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p54">54</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p54">The interface of technology and the
                                humanities represents a key to the future, yet
                                many students feel they lack the skills to
                                access this potential. This course offers an
                                introduction to web development and digital
                                publication especially created for students in
                                the Humanities, with a view to equipping you
                                with knowledge foundational for reflective
                                engagement with the new media of literary
                                creation and dissemination. Students will survey
                                the principles of current technologies and apply
                                them through practice as they learn the skills
                                and techniques for formatting and publishing
                                archival materials in a web-based environment.
                                The course builds towards the creation of a
                                digital edition, giving you the opportunity to
                                work with primary source materials available
                                through NYU's rich archival collections (these
                                include a wide variety of printed texts,
                                manuscripts and images from which to select
                                according to your interests).</div>
                                
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p55">55</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p55">The
                                course will consist of a traditional classroom
                                lecture and discussion format as well as
                                computer lab sessions to promote and assist
                                students as they work on each of their three
                                projects in this course. Each student will have
                                an account on a production webserver to post
                                their work and learn to install and configure a
                                WordPress site specifically tailored to his or
                                her primary source materials. Topics and
                                assigned projects will begin with an
                                introduction to mark-up languages and building a
                                site of related web pages followed by a project
                                centered on encoding and annotating digital
                                texts for scholarly purposes. The final project
                                involves photographing or scanning,
                                transcribing, and encoding digital texts to
                                build an online archive.</div>
                        
                  <div class="table">
                     <table class="table">
                        <tr class="row label">
                                
                           <td valign="top" class="cell">Week</td>
                                
                           <td valign="top" class="cell">Topics Covered</td>
                            
                        </tr>
                        <tr class="row">
                                
                           <td valign="top" class="cell">
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p56">56</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p56">1</div>
                           </td>
                                
                           <td valign="top" class="cell">
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p57">57</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p57">1<span class="hi superscript">st</span> hour
                                        –Literature: introduction to
                                        digitization / literary
                                        projects</div>
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p58">58</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p58">2<span class="hi superscript">nd</span>
                                        hour – Technology: Introduction to web
                                        design, mark-up languages and related
                                        technologies.</div>
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p59">59</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p59">Lab - Hands-on:
                                        Project #1 - Unix; HTML, xHTML, CSS
                                    </div>
                           </td>
                            
                        </tr>
                        <tr class="row">
                                
                           <td valign="top" class="cell">
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p60">60</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p60">2</div>
                           </td>
                                
                           <td valign="top" class="cell">
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p61">61</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p61">1<span class="hi superscript">st</span> hour –
                                        Technology: Advanced CSS; Web-authoring
                                        software; Integration of text and
                                        graphics on the web</div>
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p62">62</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p62">2<span class="hi superscript">nd</span> hour – Literature:
                                        Introduction to selected scholarly
                                        literary archival sites and critical
                                        discussion.</div>
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p63">63</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p63">Lab: Hands-on: Project
                                        #1 continued</div>
                           </td>
                            
                        </tr>
                        <tr class="row">
                                
                           <td valign="top" class="cell">
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p64">64</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p64">3</div>
                           </td>
                                
                           <td valign="top" class="cell">
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p65">65</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p65">1<span class="hi superscript">st</span> hour –
                                        Literature: Students present the
                                        scholarly literary sites to the class
                                        which they have prepared in assignment
                                        #1followed by discussion.</div>
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p66">66</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p66">2<span class="hi superscript">nd</span> hour – Technology:
                                        Advanced CSS</div>
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p67">67</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p67">Lab: Hands-on:
                                        Project #1 - Advanced CSS</div>
                           </td>
                            
                        </tr>
                        <tr class="row">
                                
                           <td valign="top" class="cell">
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p68">68</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p68">4</div>
                           </td>
                                
                           <td valign="top" class="cell">
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p69">69</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p69">1<span class="hi superscript">st</span> hour –
                                        Technology: Working with image files:
                                        file types and how to use them (GIF,
                                        JPG, PNG for use on the web as well as
                                        RAW, TIFF, PSD for archival purposes);
                                        discussion on image compression,
                                        digitization standards, and related
                                        topics; instructions on scanning images
                                        using a flat-bed scanner as well as
                                        working with cameras to capture images
                                        of archival materials.</div>
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p70">70</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p70">2<span class="hi superscript">nd</span> hour – Literature:
                                        Introduction to concepts in Metadata and
                                        building their collection; preparation
                                        for session in the archives on the next
                                        day.</div>
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p71">71</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p71">Lab: Guest Lecture: Meeting
                                        with Library and Fales Archives staff to
                                        discuss working with primary source
                                        materials, instructions on handling the
                                        materials, and copyright
                                    issues.</div>
                           </td>
                            
                        </tr>
                        <tr class="row">
                                
                           <td valign="top" class="cell">
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p72">72</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p72">5</div>
                           </td>
                                
                           <td valign="top" class="cell">
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p73">73</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p73">1<span class="hi superscript">st</span> hour –
                                        Technology: Guest Lecture in the digital
                                        imaging lab. </div>
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p74">74</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p74">The students worked
                                        in the imaging lab with both instructors
                                        present to accomplish the following in
                                        the second hour: </div>
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p75">75</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p75">2<span class="hi superscript">nd</span> hour - Technology: hands-on
                                        training on scanning and photographing
                                        primary source materials; review of
                                        Library of Congress and related
                                        standards; overview of file management
                                        practices. </div>
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p76">76</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p76">2<span class="hi superscript">nd</span> hour – Literature: approval of
                                        the primary source materials selected.
                                        </div>
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p77">77</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p77">Lab: Project #2. Students are
                                        requested to set up a web page hosting
                                        sample images for review.</div>
                           </td>
                            
                        </tr>
                        <tr class="row">
                                
                           <td valign="top" class="cell">
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p78">78</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p78">6</div>
                           </td>
                                
                           <td valign="top" class="cell">
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p79">79</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p79">Part 1 (1.5 hours): Technology –
                                        Introduction to working with a CMS;
                                        in-class demonstration of a WordPress
                                        installation, configuration and
                                        implementation; as well as themes
                                        modification and downloading themes
                                        appropriate the students’ selected
                                        archival materials. </div>
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p80">80</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p80">Part 2 –
                                        Literature: ½ hour: Round table
                                        discussion as each student describes
                                        his/her content selection and
                                        literary/scholarly focus.</div>
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p81">81</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p81">Lab:
                                        Project #2 – Install the CMS and start
                                        building the webpages for the
                                        contextualization (introduction,
                                        bibliography and related pages);
                                        configure the “child-theme”; continue
                                        working with images </div>
                           </td>
                            
                        </tr>
                        <tr class="row">
                                
                           <td valign="top" class="cell">
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p82">82</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p82">7</div>
                           </td>
                                
                           <td valign="top" class="cell">
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p83">83</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p83">Technology Class – 2 hours: WordPress
                                        and CMS concepts; in-class demonstration
                                        of site customization; integration of
                                        text and images.</div>
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p84">84</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p84">Lab: Project #2
                                        Students begin building the cataloguing
                                        section of the site.</div>
                           </td>
                            
                        </tr>
                        <tr class="row">
                                
                           <td valign="top" class="cell">
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p85">85</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p85">8</div>
                           </td>
                                
                           <td valign="top" class="cell">
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p86">86</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p86">Literature Class – 2 hours: discussion
                                        on problems and possibilities that
                                        students encounter with their selected
                                        texts (including discussion of the
                                        principles of manuscript
                                        transcription).</div>
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p87">87</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p87">Lab: Project #2 –
                                        Students continue work on their
                                        project.</div>
                           </td>
                            
                        </tr>
                        <tr class="row">
                                
                           <td valign="top" class="cell">
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p88">88</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p88">9</div>
                           </td>
                                
                           <td valign="top" class="cell">
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p89">89</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p89">Technology – 1<span class="hi superscript">st</span>
                                        hour: ½ hour each on technical problems
                                        and questions students have about their
                                        individual sites; and a summary on the
                                        contents expected for the technical
                                        “about” page on the
                                        site.</div>
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p90">90</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p90">Technology 2<span class="hi superscript">nd</span> hour: Introduction to XML,
                                        encoding text and
                                        XML-TEI.</div>
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p91">91</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p91">Literature: poems by
                                        William Carlos Williams.</div>
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p92">92</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p92">Lab:
                                        Hands-on: Completion of Project #2;
                                        Students begin work on Project #3
                                        (XML-TEI)</div>
                           </td>
                            
                        </tr>
                        <tr class="row">
                                
                           <td valign="top" class="cell">
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p93">93</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p93">10</div>
                           </td>
                                
                           <td valign="top" class="cell">
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p94">94</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p94">1st hour: Technology: Class lecture and
                                        discussion on XML-TEI.</div>
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p95">95</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p95">2<span class="hi superscript">nd</span> hour:
                                        Technology/Literature: Encoding Hamlet’s
                                        <span class="hi italic">Soliloquy</span> and the
                                        <span class="hi italic">Soliloquy</span> from
                                        <span class="hi italic">Huck Finn</span>
                                        (Chapter 21, excerpt) in XML-TEI.
                                        Students are asked to encode
                                        Shakespeare’s Sonnet 116 for the
                                        following week.</div>
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p96">96</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p96">Lab: Project #3 –
                                        XML-TEI, continued</div>
                           </td>
                            
                        </tr>
                        <tr class="row">
                                
                           <td valign="top" class="cell">
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p97">97</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p97">11</div>
                           </td>
                                
                           <td valign="top" class="cell">
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p98">98</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p98">1.5 hours: Literature - Case study on
                                        sonnets.</div>
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p99">99</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p99">Last ½ hour: Technology -
                                        introduction to XSL/ XSLT</div>
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p100">100</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p100">Lab:
                                        Project #3 – XML-TEI,
                                    continued</div>
                           </td>
                            
                        </tr>
                        <tr class="row">
                                
                           <td valign="top" class="cell">
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p101">101</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p101">12</div>
                           </td>
                                
                           <td valign="top" class="cell">
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p102">102</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p102">1<span class="hi superscript">st</span> hour:
                                        Technology Site sustainability (e.g.
                                        creating a static HTML/CSS site from a
                                        CMS site for preservation purposes and
                                        permanent installations and technical
                                        questions that came up.</div>
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p103">103</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p103">2<span class="hi superscript">nd</span> hour: Literature –
                                        Discussion on the “about” statements
                                        from a literary perspective.</div>
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p104">104</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p104">Lab:
                                        Completion of materials and preparation
                                        for class presentations.</div>
                           </td>
                            
                        </tr>
                        <tr class="row">
                                
                           <td valign="top" class="cell">
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p105">105</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p105">13</div>
                           </td>
                                
                           <td valign="top" class="cell">
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p106">106</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p106">1<span class="hi superscript">st</span> hour: Student
                                        Presentations in lieu of a final
                                        exam</div>
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p107">107</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p107">2<span class="hi superscript">nd</span> hour:
                                        Technology – Additional requested topics
                                        included WordPress for blogging and
                                        considerations in crowd-sourcing; using
                                        Oxygen for editing XML; and other
                                        technical questions and topics that
                                        arose as students worked on their
                                        sites.</div>
                           </td>
                            
                        </tr>
                        <tr class="row">
                                
                           <td valign="top" class="cell">
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p108">108</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p108">14</div>
                           </td>
                                
                           <td valign="top" class="cell">
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p109">109</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p109">Student Presentations in lieu of a
                                        final exam.</div>
                              <div class="counter">
                                 <a href="#p110">110</a>
                              </div>
                              <div class="ptext" id="p110">Discussion on future
                                        projects and where to go from
                                    here.</div>
                           </td>
                            
                        </tr>
                     </table>
                     <div class="caption-no-label">
                        <div class="label">Table 1. </div>
                     </div>
                  </div>
            
               </div>
            
               <div class="div div0">
                        
                  <h1 class="head">Assessment and Grade
                            Distribution:</h1>
                        
                  <div class="ptext">
                     <ul class="list">
                        <li class="item">Assignment #1 (Humanities site evaluation) –
                                10% of the final grade</li>
                        <li class="item">Assignment #2 (Proposal for project #2 –
                                selection of Fales materials, including
                                rationale) – included in the project #2
                                grade</li>
                        <li class="item">Project #1 – Build a unified site on an author
                                of the student’s choice - 20% of the final
                                grade</li>
                        <li class="item">Project #2 – Online digital archive based on
                                primary source materials using WordPress - 40%
                                of the final grade. </li>
                        <li class="item">Project #3 – Use TEI to encode several
                                representative samples of literary texts in the
                                student’s archival site - 30% of the final
                                grade</li>
                     </ul>
                  </div>
           
               </div>
        
        
        
                    
                
            </div>
            
            <div id="notes">
               <h2>Notes</h2>
               <div class="endnote" id="d0e502">
                  <span class="noteRef">[1]</span> For example,<cite class="title italic">The
                                    Rossetti Web</cite> (<a class="ref" href="http://www.rossettiarchive.org/" onclick="window.open('http://www.rossettiarchive.org/'); return false">http://www.rossettiarchive.org/</a>);
                                    <cite class="title italic">The Carlyle Letters
                                    Online</cite> (<a class="ref" href="http://carlyleletters.dukejournals.org/" onclick="window.open('http://carlyleletters.dukejournals.org/'); return false">http://carlyleletters.dukejournals.org/</a>);
                                <cite class="title italic">The Shelley-Godwin Archive</cite>
                                (<a class="ref" href="http://shelleygodwinarchive.org/" onclick="window.open('http://shelleygodwinarchive.org/'); return false">http://shelleygodwinarchive.org/</a>). </div>
            </div>
            <div id="worksCited">
               <h2>Works Cited</h2>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="adams2007"><!-- close -->Adams 2007</span> Adams, D. Robert. "Integration early: a new approach to teaching web application
                            development." <cite class="title italic">J. Comput.
                                Sci. Coll.</cite> 23,
                            1 (October 2007), 97-104.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="bills2007"><!-- close -->Bills and Canosa 2007</span>  Dianne P. Bills and Roxanne
                            L. Canosa. "Sharing introductory programming
                            curriculum across disciplines." In <cite class="title italic">Proceedings
                                of the 8th ACM SIGITE conference on Information
                                technology education</cite> (SIGITE 2007). ACM,
                            New York, NY, USA, 99-106. </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="bunde2010a"><!-- close -->Bunde and Engel 2010a</span> 
                            "Computing in the Humanities:
                                An Interdisciplinary Partnership in
                                Undergraduate Education" <cite class="title italic">Journal of Archival
                                    Organization</cite>, 1533-2756, Volume 8, Issue 2, 2010, 149–159</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="bunde2010b"><!-- close -->Bunde and Engel 2010b</span> Bunde, Janet  and Deena Engel.
                             "An Inter-Disciplinary
                                Approach to Web Programming: A Collaboration
                                Between the University Archives and the
                                Department of Computer Science," <cite class="title italic">Digital
                                    Humanities Conference</cite>, London.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="burdick2012"><!-- close -->Burdick et al 2012</span>  
                            Burdick, Anne, Johanna Drucker,
                            Peter Lunenfield, Todd Presner, Jeffrey Schnapp.
                            <cite class="title italic">Digital_Humanities</cite>.
                            Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press (2012).</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="chang2010"><!-- close -->Chang and Lee 2010</span> Chang, Ling-Chian and Greg C.
                            Lee. "A team-teaching model for practicing
                            project-based learning in high school: Collaboration
                            between computer and subject teachers."
                <cite class="title italic">Comput. Educ.</cite> 55, 3 (November 2010), 961-969.
                                </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="connolly2011"><!-- close -->Connolly, 2011</span>  Connolly, Randy
                W. "Awakening
                            Rip Van Winkle: modernizing the computer science web
                            curriculum." In <cite class="title italic">Proceedings of the 16th annual
                                joint conference on Innovation and technology in
                                computer science education</cite> (ITiCSE '11).
                            ACM, New York, NY, USA, 18-22. </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="cummings2013"><!-- close -->Cummings 2013</span>  Cummings, James.
                "The Text Encoding Initiative and
                                the Study of Literature". In <cite class="title italic">A Companion to Digital Literary
                                Studies</cite>, ed. Ray Siemens and Susan
                                Schreibman. Chichester,
                            West Sussex: Blackwell. 451-457.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="engel2013"><!-- close -->Engel 2013</span>  Engel,
                            Deena. <cite class="title italic">Embracing the Digital Humanities:
                                A Course on Computing in the Humanities for
                                Undergraduate Computer Science Minor
                                Students</cite>
                            
                  <a class="ref" href="http://db.grinnell.edu/sigcse/sigcse2013/Program/viewAcceptedProposal.pdf?sessionType=poster&amp;sessionNumber=2" onclick="window.open('http://db.grinnell.edu/sigcse/sigcse2013/Program/viewAcceptedProposal.pdf?sessionType=poster&amp;sessionNumber=2'); return false">http://db.grinnell.edu/sigcse/sigcse2013/Program/viewAcceptedProposal.pdf?sessionType=poster&amp;sessionNumber=2</a>
                            SIGCSE 2013.
                        </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="frankel2000"><!-- close -->Frankel 2000</span>  Frankel, Nicholas.
                 <cite class="title italic">Oscar Wilde’s Decorated
                            Books</cite>. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan
                     Press. 2000.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="gousie2006"><!-- close -->Gousie 2006</span>  Gousie, Michael B.
                "A robust web
                            programming and graphics course for non-majors."
                                <cite class="title italic">SIGCSE Bull.</cite> 38, 1 (March 2006),
                            72-76. </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="greenberg2012"><!-- close -->Greenberg et al 2012</span>  Greenberg, Ira, Deepak Kumar,
                            and Dianna Xu. "Creative coding and visual
                            portfolios for CS1." In <cite class="title italic">Proceedings of the 43rd
                                ACM technical symposium on Computer
                                Science Education</cite> (SIGCSE 2012). ACM, New
                            York, NY, USA, 247-252. </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="gülbahar2006"><!-- close -->Gülbahar and Tinmaz 2006</span> 
                Gülbahar, Yasemin and Hasan
                            Tinmaz. <a class="ref" href="http://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/EJ728907.pdf" onclick="window.open('http://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/EJ728907.pdf'); return false">http://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/EJ728907.pdf</a>.
                 <cite class="title italic">Implementing Project-Based Learning</cite>, 2006.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="guzdial2010"><!-- close -->Guzdial 2010</span> 
                            Guzdial, Mark. "Does
                            contextualized computing education help?"
                            <cite class="title italic">ACM Inroads</cite> 1, 4 (December
                            2010), 4-6. </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="guzdial2005"><!-- close -->Guzdial and Forte 2005</span>  Guzdial, Mark and Andrea
                            Forte. "Design process for a non-majors
                            computing course." <cite class="title italic">SIGCSE Bull.</cite> 37, 1
                            (February 2005), 361-365. </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="guzdial2012"><!-- close -->Guzdial et al 2012</span> 
                            Guzdial, Mark,  Barbara J.
                            Ericson, Tom McKlin, and Shelly Engelman. "A
                            statewide survey on computing education pathways and
                            influences: factors in broadening participation in
                            computing." In <cite class="title italic">Proceedings of the ninth annual
                                international conference on International
                                computing education research</cite> (ICER 2012).
                            ACM, New York, NY, USA, 143-150. </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="hirsch2012"><!-- close -->Hirsch 2012</span>  Hirsch, Brett
                            D., Ed. <cite class="title italic">Digital Humanities
                                Pedagogy: Practices, Principles and
                                Politics</cite>, Cambridge, UK: OpenBook
                            Publishers (2012).</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="kurkovsky2007"><!-- close -->Kurkovsky 2007</span> 
                            Kurkovsky, Stan. "Making
                            computing attractive for non-majors: a course
                            design." <cite class="title italic">J. Comput.
                                Small Coll.</cite> 22, 3
                            (January 2007), 90-97.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="leblanc2010"><!-- close -->LeBlanc et al 2010</span> 
                            LeBlanc, Mark D., Tom Armstrong,
                            and Michael B. Gousie. "Connecting across
                            campus." In "Proceedings of the 41st ACM
                                technical symposium on Computer science
                                education" (SIGCSE 2010). ACM, New York,
                            NY, USA, 52-56. </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="liu2011"><!-- close -->Liu and Phelps 2011</span>  Liu, Yi and Gita Phelps.
                            "Challenges and professional tools used when teaching
                            web programming." <cite class="title italic">J.
                                Comput. Sci. Coll.</cite>
                            26, 5 (May 2011), 116-121.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="mackellar2012"><!-- close -->MacKellar 2012</span>  MacKellar,
                Bonnie K. "An XML course as a
                                springboard for teaching fundamental computer
                                science ideas." "J. Comput. Sci. Coll."
                                27, 3 (January 2012), 15-21. </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="mcgann2001"><!-- close -->McGann 2001</span>  McGann, Jerome.
                <cite class="title italic">Radiant Textuality: Literature after the World
                            Wide Web</cite>. New York, Palgrave: 2001.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="mendes2012"><!-- close -->Mendes et al 2012</span>  Mendes, Antonio Jose, Anabela
                            Gomes, Amilcar Cardoso, and Luis Paquete. 
                            "Increasing student commitment in introductory
                            programming learning." In <cite class="title italic">Proceedings of the
                                2012 IEEE Frontiers in Education Conference
                                (FIE)</cite> (FIE 2012). IEEE Computer Society,
                            Washington, DC, USA, 1-6. </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="mitchell2012"><!-- close -->Mitchell et al 2012</span> 
                            Mitchell, Eleanor, Peggy Seiden,
                            and Suzy Taraba, Eds. <cite class="title italic">Past or Portal? Enhancing Undergraduate
                                Learning through Special Collections and
                                Archives</cite>. American Library Association.
                            Chapter 7 in "Pedagogy": <cite class="title italic">New York
                                University: Computing in the Humanities @ NYU
                                Libraries</cite> by Janet Bunde, Deena Engel and
                            Paula Feid.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="park2011"><!-- close -->Park and Wiedenbeck 2011</span>  Park, Thomas H. and Susan
                            Wiedenbeck. "Learning web development:
                            challenges at an earlier stage of computing
                            education." In <cite class="title italic">Proceedings of the seventh
                                international workshop on Computing education
                                research</cite> (ICER 2011). ACM, New York, NY,
                            USA, 125-132. </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="patterson2005"><!-- close -->Paterson et al 2005</span>  Paterson, James H., Frances McCormick, and Gerry
                                Creechan. "Teaching XML in a web
                                development context." In 
                                    <cite class="title italic">Proceedings of the 10th annual SIGCSE
                                    conference on Innovation and technology in
                                    computer science education</cite>
                                (ITiCSE 2005). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 359-359.
                                </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="price2012"><!-- close -->Price 2012</span>  Price, Leah. 2012.
                <cite class="title italic">How
                                to Do Things with Books in Victorian
                                Britain</cite>. Princeton: Princeton University
                            Press.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="price2013"><!-- close -->Price 2013</span>  Price, Kenneth M.
                "Electronic
                            Scholarly Editions." In <cite class="title italic">A
                                Companion to Digital Literary Studies</cite>, ed.
                            Ray Siemens and Susan Schreibman. Chichester, West Sussex: Blackwell, 2013.
                            434-450</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="pulimood2008"><!-- close -->Pulimood and Wolz 2008</span>  Pulimood, Sarah Monisha and
                            Ursula Wolz. "Problem solving in community: a
                            necessary shift in cs pedagogy." <cite class="title italic">SIGCSE
                                Bull.</cite> 40, 1 (March 2008), 210-214. </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="richards2009"><!-- close -->Richards 2009</span> 
                            Richards, Debbie. "Designing
                            Project-Based Courses with a Focus on Group
                            Formation and Assessment." <cite class="title italic">Trans. Comput.
                                Educ.</cite> 9, 1, Article 2 (March 2009), 40
                            pages. </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="schaub2009"><!-- close -->Schaub 2009</span>  Schaub, Stephen.
                "Teaching CS1 with
                            web applications and test-driven development."
                                <cite class="title italic">SIGCSE Bull.</cite> 41, 2 (June 2009),
                            113-117. </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="stephenson2007"><!-- close -->Stephenson et al 2007</span>  Stephenson, Peter, L. Miguel,
                            Joan Peckham, Jean-Yves Hervé, and Ron Hutt.
                            "Using undergraduate interdisciplinary research to
                            promote computer science." <cite class="title italic">J.
                                Comput. Sci. Coll.</cite> 22, 3 (January 2007),
                            98-104. </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="updike1969"><!-- close -->Updike 1969</span>  John
                            Updike, <cite class="title italic">Midpoint</cite>. New York: Knopf, 1969.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="wang2009"><!-- close -->Wang and Zahadat 2009</span>  Ye Diana Wang and Nima
                            Zahadat. "Teaching web development in the web
                            2.0 era." In <cite class="title italic">Proceedings of the
                                10th ACM conference on SIG-information
                                technology education</cite> (SIGITE 2009). ACM, New
                            York, NY, USA, 80-86. </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="yue2004"><!-- close -->Yue and Ding 2004</span>  Yue, Kwok-Bun and Wei Ding. 
                            "Design and evolution of an undergraduate course on
                            web application development." In <cite class="title italic">Proceedings of
                                the 9th annual SIGCSE conference on Innovation
                                and technology in computer science
                                education</cite> (ITiCSE 2004). ACM, New York,
                            NY, USA, 22-26. </div>
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar">
               <a href="#">Preview</a>  |  <span style="color: grey">XML</span> |  <a href="#" onclick="javascript:window.print();" title="Click for print friendly version">Print Article</a>
            </div>
         </div>
      </div>
   </body>
</html>