<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
      <title>[PREVIEW] DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly: </title>
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_screen.css" media="screen" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_print.css" media="print" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" /><style type="text/css">
        #mainContent {
          float: none;
          padding-top: 2em;
          padding-left: 4em;
          padding-right: 4em;
          margin-left: 225px;
           
        }</style></head>
   <body>
      <div id="mainContent">
         <div xmlns:dhqBiblio="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/ns/biblio" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" class="DHQarticle">
            <div id="pubInfo">Preview<br />Volume  Number 
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar">
               <form id="taporware" action="get">
                  <div><a href="//preview/index.html">Preview</a>
                      | 
                     <a rel="external" href="//vol///000420.xml">XML</a>
                     
                     | 
                     		   Discuss
                     			(<a href="/dhq/vol///000420/000420.html#disqus_thread" data-disqus-identifier="000420">
                        				Comments
                        			</a>)
                     
                  </div>
               </form>
            </div>
            
            <div class="DHQheader">
               
               
               
               
               <h1 class="articleTitle lang en">Raising Visibility in the Digital Humanities
                  Landscape: Academic Engagement and the Question of the Library’s Role
               </h1>
               
               
               <div class="author"><span style="color: grey">Kathleen Kasten-Mutkus
                     </span> &lt;<a href="mailto:kathleen_dot_kasten_at_stonybrook_dot_edu" onclick="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('kathleen_dot_kasten_at_stonybrook_dot_edu'); return false;" onkeypress="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('kathleen_dot_kasten_at_stonybrook_dot_edu'); return false;">kathleen_dot_kasten_at_stonybrook_dot_edu</a>&gt;, Stony Brook University
               </div>
               
               <div class="author"><span style="color: grey">Laura Costello </span> &lt;<a href="mailto:darren_dot_chase_at_stonybrook_dot_edu" onclick="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('darren_dot_chase_at_stonybrook_dot_edu'); return false;" onkeypress="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('darren_dot_chase_at_stonybrook_dot_edu'); return false;">darren_dot_chase_at_stonybrook_dot_edu</a>&gt;, Stony Brook University
               </div>
               
               <div class="author"><span style="color: grey">Darren Chase </span> &lt;<a href="mailto:laura_dot_costello_at_stonybrook_dot_edu" onclick="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('laura_dot_costello_at_stonybrook_dot_edu'); return false;" onkeypress="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('laura_dot_costello_at_stonybrook_dot_edu'); return false;">laura_dot_costello_at_stonybrook_dot_edu</a>&gt;, Stony Brook University
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               <span class="Z3988" title="url_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;rft_val_fmt=info%3Aofi%2Ffmt%3Akev%3Amtx%3Ajournal&amp;rfr_id=info%3Asid%2Fzotero.org%3A2&amp;rft.genre=article&amp;rft.atitle=Raising%20Visibility%20in%20the%20Digital%20Humanities%20Landscape%3A%20Academic%20Engagement%20and%20the%20Question%20of%20the%20Library%E2%80%99s%20Role&amp;rft.jtitle=Digital%20Humanities%20Quarterly&amp;rft.stitle=DHQ&amp;rft.issn=1938-4122&amp;rft.date=&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.aulast=Kasten-Mutkus&amp;rft.aufirst=Kathleen&amp;rft.au=Kathleen%20Kasten-Mutkus&amp;rft.au=Laura%20Costello&amp;rft.au=Darren%20Chase"> </span></div>
            
            
            <div id="DHQtext">
               
               
               <div id="abstract">
                  <h2>Abstract</h2>
                  
                  <p>Academic libraries have an important role to play in supporting digital
                     humanities projects in their communities. Librarians at Stony Brook University
                     Libraries host Open Mic events for digital humanities researchers, teachers, and
                     students on campus.  Inspired by a desire to better serve digital humanists with
                     existing projects, this event was initially organized to increase the visibility
                     of scholars and students with nascent projects and connect these digital
                     humanists to library supported resources and to one another. For the Libraries,
                     the Open Mic was an opportunity to understand the scope and practices of the
                     digital humanities community at Stony Brook, and to identify ways to make
                     meaningful interventions.   An open mic is a uniquely suitable event format in
                     that it embodies a dynamic, permissive, multidisciplinary presentation space
                     that is as much for exercising new and ongoing research (and technologies) as it
                     is for making discoveries and connections.  The success of these events can be
                     measured in the establishment of the University Libraries as a nexus for digital
                     humanities work, consultations, instruction, workshops, and community on a
                     campus without a designated digital humanities center.   The digital humanities
                     Open Mic event at Stony Brook University locates the digital humanities within
                     the library’s repertoire, while signaling that the library is — in a number of
                     essential ways — open.
                  </p>
                  
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Introduction</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p1">1</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p1"> The digital humanities are problematic to place. In his explanation of the
                     visionary aspects of the digital humanities, Patrik Svensson[<a class="ref" href="#svensson2012">Svensson 2012</a>] suggests that the interdisciplinarity of the
                     discipline disrupts traditional academic structures. Supporting digital
                     humanities efforts requires an organizational and budgetary structure that
                     universities, siloed into academic departments, are not equipped to support. The
                     academic library, however, transcends some of these traditional boundaries and
                     can be a setting for digital humanities encounters. The unique position of the
                     library as a cross-disciplinary resource can provide space and structure for
                     interdisciplinary connection. The library is the right place to develop digital
                     humanities programing because it has the capacity for multi-view support of
                     projects from their early stages and can facilitate interdisciplinary
                     collaboration.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p2">2</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p2">With flexible spaces, information resources, and systems for discovering,
                     curating, and preserving information, the library deliberately weaves expertise
                     throughout departments and disciplines. Programs, such as lecture series,
                     workshops, and more informal events, are an important strategy to make visible
                     the library’s potential as an intellectual, pedagogical, and practical center
                     for digital humanities work on campus. Programming raises the library’s profile
                     while also highlighting the problems it faces as a campus entity engaged in the
                     digital humanities, as well as potential strategies to counter them. One key
                     issue is the lack of spaces on campus, both physical and intellectual, for more
                     casual interdisciplinary engagement at the early stage of research or teaching
                     projects in the digital humanities. This lacuna underscores the need to
                     communicate the library’s potential to campus stakeholders, as well as to
                     present it to them in a legible way capable of inspiring collaboration.
                     Librarians at Stony Brook University have taken steps, through instruction,
                     programming, and collaboration, to raise the profile of the library as a nexus
                     of digital humanities activity. This has afforded the library the opportunity to
                     question the role of librarians in digital humanities research, as well as the
                     ways in which digital humanities research enters into dialogue with the
                     interdisciplinarity and modularity of the academic library. As a result of the
                     increased visibility of the library to the digital humanities community at Stony
                     Brook University, librarians formed a working group to combine their talents and
                     expertise in order to provide a menu of services and support which transcends
                     the expertise of any individual member of the group. The synergy and
                     collaborative energy of this group enables librarians to demonstrate their
                     ability to play a broader, more visible role in digital humanities research and
                     to function as leaders in this dynamic field.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p3">3</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p3">This programmatic, multifaceted commitment to creating a digital humanities
                     presence in the library draws its energy, focus, and scholarly network through
                     formal and informal programming. Informal events based around networking and
                     sharing unfinished work in particular are a uniquely suitable format in that
                     they embody a dynamic, permissive, multidisciplinary presentation space that is
                     as meaningful for exercising new and ongoing research (and technologies) as it
                     is for making discoveries and connections. These events, at which faculty and
                     students are invited to give lightning talks about ongoing research, or simply
                     to listen and learn, provided a foundation on which to build the library’s
                     digital humanities program. The openness, inclusivity, and visibility of these
                     events complement and enhance the library’s digital humanities consultation and
                     instruction services, putting librarians in touch with faculty and students in
                     need of support. Additionally, programming and outreach contribute to the
                     visible of the library while simultaneously privileging its interdisciplinarity
                     and the flexibility of its services, spaces, and collections as they are
                     tailored to digital humanities research and teaching.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p4">4</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p4">This article discusses the programming, consultations, instruction sessions,
                     workshops, and working group within the context of collaborative and
                     interdisciplinary work in the digital humanities. In addition to providing an
                     outreach template for academic librarians seeking a resource-light introduction
                     to digital humanities projects and researchers on their campuses, this
                     discussion draws into relief the ways in which the digital humanities challenges
                     and reconditions the role and visibility of the librarian as consultant and
                     collaborator. This forms part of a discourse on the nature of collaboration in
                     the digital humanities and on the library as an interdisciplinary space capable
                     of facilitating and engaging in multimodal research and practice. The digital
                     humanities content at Stony Brook University locates the digital humanities
                     within the library’s repertoire, while signaling that the library is — in a
                     number of essential ways — open.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Library Services and the Digital Humanities</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p5">5</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p5">The digital humanities programming and services at Stony Brook University
                     Libraries provide an opportunity to discuss and problematize the ways in which
                     programming and outreach can help libraries to understand the needs of their
                     digital humanities constituencies. The professional literature is replete with
                     examples of the complex relationship between libraries and digital humanists, as
                     well as the exciting, yet frightening, possibilities of tailoring this dynamic
                     to fit the needs of an individual campus. As academic libraries engage with the
                     digital humanities on their campuses, they are faced with a decision about the
                     degree of involvement they have the capacity to provide. Some librarians are
                     consultants, offering advice to researchers regarding data curation, digital
                     preservation, and GIS or text-mining technologies. Other librarians position
                     themselves as active practioners and partners in the research process, becoming
                     engaged in digital humanities projects on grant applications and as co-authors.
                     Beyond this dichotomy exist other considerations which must be addressed by
                     libraries, including building collections that are mindful of the needs of
                     digital humanists. This can include data visualization and GIS software, or
                     advocating for text-mining rights in digital collections.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p6">6</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p6">After decades of development, experimentation, and growth, many digital humanists
                     point to the value of considering the digital humanities not as an umbrella, but
                     as a rich, diverse, and sometimes unrelated gathering of research practices
                     which bring the humanities into contact with the empirical [<a class="ref" href="#kirschenbaum2012">Kirschenbaum 2012</a>]. This approach tends to destabilize the notion
                     of a monolithic digital humanities in favor of a discussion of individualized
                     research practices and tools intended to promote contact with cultural objects,
                     interdisciplinary, collaboration, and new interpretations of existing corpora.
                     The academic library is ideally situated at the crossroads of these concepts,
                     and has an important intellectual and practical role to play in the continued
                     development of the digital humanities. Kirschenbaum’s foundational essay
                     considers the digital humanities primarily from the perspective of English
                     departments, though his observations regarding the nature of work in the digital
                     humanities are extremely applicable to the interdisciplinary, flexible academic
                     library. Indeed, other chapters in the same edited volume, <cite class="title italic">Debates in the Digital Humanities</cite>, as well as the contributions in
                     the 2016 edition, underscore similar points by emphasizing the simultaneously
                     problematic and opportunity-rich dynamic between digital humanists, the
                     humanities, and libraries.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p7">7</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p7">In many ways, the flexibility of the library, its visibility on campus, and the
                     intersectionality of its mission and philosophy render it both neutral and
                     uniquely suitable for early-stage thought. This is reinforced by the library’s
                     frequently consultative and pedagogical role in supporting the digital
                     humanities on campus. Librarians have been extending the invitation to their
                     liaison departments and collaborating with faculty members in their disciplines
                     to produce and support digital humanities projects. This ongoing conversation
                     between librarians, non-library faculty members, and students is reflected in
                     the openness, creativity, and collaboration inherent in library spaces for the
                     digital humanities. That these outreach strategies are successful — even for
                     those who do not attend — is evidenced by the increased visibility of the
                     library in the digital humanities community on campus, as well as the increase
                     in requests for instruction, collaboration, and consultations.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p8">8</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p8">In order to facilitate extended collaboration, Stony Brook University Librarians
                     offer workshops on topics, tools, and practices of use to scholars working in
                     the digital humanities, placed in context by the needs that we observe when
                     working with researchers during and after programs. Examples include a workshop
                     for digital humanists who are interested in incorporating text mining as a
                     research tool, but who may lack the technical background to create their own
                     programs. Using a freely accessible text mining tool, Stony Brook University
                     librarians helped to demystify an important digital humanities practice and to
                     encourage humanists to use it to support their research. Workshops dedicated to
                     other visualization tools, have been popular with students and researchers
                     interested in learning to visualize their data in creative and impactful ways.
                     These two examples illustrate a commitment to providing in-depth, tailored
                     instruction on using digital humanities tools. However, they are also indicative
                     of the ways in which digital humanities work is changing the role of the
                     librarian in research. Workshops offer a platform for librarians to demonstrate
                     their expertise and to share it with a broader audience. Because these events
                     are publicized to the campus community, they also contribute to the libraries’
                     growing reputation for and visibility as a digital humanities space. Librarians
                     plan workshop content by expanding their own technical and research skills, with
                     the end result that digital humanities workshops carry the dual benefit of
                     improving library services in the digital humanities while simultaneously
                     enhancing awareness on campus of the library as a resource and as a leader in
                     this area. Evidence of these phenomena can be observed in the feedback loop
                     which exists between the advertisement of workshops, workshop attendance or
                     non-attendance, and subsequent requests for individual consultations with
                     librarians.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p9">9</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p9">Librarians also teach course-embedded workshops on creating digital humanities
                     content. It is important to note that requests for these sessions are typically
                     inspired by instructor participation in, or awareness of, another digital
                     humanities event at the library, such as an Open Mic or a workshop. By
                     participating in undergraduate- and graduate- level instruction in topics such
                     as multimodal storytelling, digital humanities tools, open textual corpora, and
                     the role of the library, librarians elucidate the work that they are already
                     doing to support this broad and varied field. Additionally, instruction sessions
                     offer the benefit of introducing the library and librarians to students who are
                     already interested in learning more about the field. This classroom connection
                     has inspired requests for research consultations and further support.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p10">10</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p10">An unforeseen benefit of librarian participation in digital humanities courses,
                     particularly in those at the graduate level, has been the increased visibility
                     of the ways in which digital humanities as a mode of inquiry can enhance or
                     inflect the careers of early career scholars working in humanities fields. The
                     opportunity to become involved in graduate research in the digital humanities is
                     also a chance to demystify librarianship, particularly technically-inflected
                     librarianship, to a group of students who may be interested in pursuing a career
                     outside of the professoriate as it is traditionally conceived.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p11">11</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p11">Taken together, the strategies used to keep in touch with the digital humanities
                     community at Stony Brook University, in addition and subsequent to the start of
                     the Open Mic events series, render visible key questions in the role of
                     librarians in the digital humanities.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Cultivating Visibility through Programming</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p12">12</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p12">In order to gain the information necessary to identify and decide how to brand
                     their role in emerging research, librarians need to build strong relationships
                     with researchers, teachers, and students on their campuses. This is particularly
                     important in a digital humanities context because of the inherent
                     interdisciplinarity of the field, as well as the variety of practices which can,
                     are, or could be identified as digital humanities.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p13">13</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p13">To plan and promote the digital humanities in the library, librarians at Stony
                     Brook University drew on examples from the literature. Though there is no direct
                     parallel, many universities have successfully engaged their communities in open
                     digital humanities activities aimed at creating communities of practice in
                     library spaces. In 2015, Arianne Hartsell-Gundy, Laura Braunstein, and Liorah
                     Golomb edited a volume entitled, <cite class="title italic">Digital Humanities in the
                        Library: Challenges and Opportunities for Subject Specialists.</cite> In
                     many ways, the contributed essays in this book reflect the inherent overlaps,
                     tensions, and opportunities in the relationship between the digital humanities
                     and the library. Importantly, they also place this dynamic within the context of
                     the broader role of the liaison librarian, with its emphasis on forming close
                     relationships with academic departments in order to provide tailored service.
                     This concept is particularly important in the context of the digital humanities
                     because it is a field which challenges the liaison relationship to expand toward
                     collaboration. Other studies treat this theme from a perspective which
                     emphasizes the nature of collaboration itself. Developing informal communities
                     was one of the themes identified by Hannah Rasmussen, Brian Croxall, and Jessica
                     Otis in their interviews with librarians engaged in digital humanities work.
                     They argue that these context-specific, informal communities of practice are a
                     good fit for the protean nature of digital humanities practice [<a class="ref" href="#rasmussen2017">Rasmussen 2017</a>].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p14">14</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p14">Harriett E. Green’s article in <cite class="title italic">Library Quarterly</cite>
                     [<a class="ref" href="#green2014">Green 2014</a>] explores five examples of digital humanities
                     partnerships, including a project at the University of Virginia (UVA) that began
                     in 1992 with the creation of a dedicated space for electronic text encoding
                     called the Etext Center. Since then, UVA has rebranded as the <cite class="title italic">Scholars’ Lab</cite> and expanded the center in line with its
                     mission of digital humanities research and development. In her article about the
                     role of the Scholars’ Lab in UVA’s digital humanities production, Bethany
                     Nowviskie asks whether library centers of the digital humanities are uniquely
                     able to “demonstrate many possible paths, that is, by
                     walking them, and by sharing narratives of failure, success, and ongoing
                     experimentation?”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#nowviskie2013">Nowviskie 2013</a>, 62]. This concept of creating a space of
                     digital humanities connection and experimentation in the exploratory context of
                     the library is particularly relevant to the design of the Digital Humanities
                     Open Mic events at Stony Brook. The Open Mic event was designed to create a
                     space in the Library where students and faculty could encounter one another and
                     produce organic collaborations. Unlike the Scholars’ Lab, Stony Brook’s space is
                     not dedicated full time to this purpose, but the missions are alike.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p15">15</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p15">The creation of experimental and research-oriented spaces for the digital
                     humanities is one of the core advantages of hosting these activities in the
                     library rather than in academic departments. Chris Alen Sula [<a class="ref" href="#sula2013">Sula 2013</a>] found a great overlap between the work that libraries
                     already seek to do to build collections, support scholarship, and provide
                     development opportunities in digital settings and the work involved in producing
                     and supporting digital humanities content. The role that librarians play in the
                     digital humanities process differs greatly between institutions, though Miriam
                     Posner [<a class="ref" href="#posner2013">Posner 2013</a>] makes the case that librarians should act as
                     collaborators rather than supporters of digital humanities projects. She also
                     highlights several challenges to this model including lack of institutional
                     support, training opportunities, and incentives for librarians. SUNY Potsdam
                     College also experienced challenges in marketing digital humanities events but
                     found success in appealing to faculty who then promoted the event to their
                     students [<a class="ref" href="#andrews2014">Andrews 2014</a>]. Certainly, most institutions are not
                     enabled to support initiatives as complex as UVA’s <cite class="title italic">Scholars’ Lab,</cite> which makes initiatives with low barrier to entry
                     particularly valuable to libraries facing these challenges.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p16">16</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p16">Several other low-burden methods are outlined in the article <cite class="title italic">Evolving in Common: Creating Mutually Supportive Relationships Between
                        Libraries and the Digital Humanities</cite> including participating in the
                     digital humanities conversation in larger online communities via Twitter,
                     listservs, and online resources like the Digital Research Tools (DiRT) Wiki [<a class="ref" href="#vandegrift2013">Vandegrift 2013</a>]. Though Stony Brook’s digital humanities events
                     were promoted via social media, using these platforms to engage with the greater
                     digital humanities conversation is a good future direction. Like the in-person
                     event, digital platforms are an effective way to make connections within the
                     University and with outside researchers working on similar projects.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p17">17</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p17">Digital humanities programs and spaces are opportunities to explore and discover
                     new boundaries to the very nature of librarian-faculty-student collaboration. By
                     engaging outside of the classroom and off the reference desk, librarians “change the conversation”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#nalanimeulemans2013">Nalani Meulemans 2013</a>] with faculty and students through
                     demonstrations of their expertise and scholarship beyond the course-integrated
                     and supporting roles they typically play.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Leveraging Librarian Skills and Identifying New Directions</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p18">18</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p18">Building on their existing interdisciplinarity, librarians must develop the tools
                     and infrastructure necessary to support work in the multidisciplinary,
                     multimodal area of the digital humanities. This goal is served by interrogating
                     the tools and skill sets libraries and librarians need to have or cultivate in
                     order to support the digital humanities, particularly with regard to the ways in
                     which they can expand skills, services, spaces, and collections in order to
                     serve a diverse community of researchers, teachers, and students.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p19">19</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p19">Scholars working in the digital humanities at Stony Brook University and at many
                     other institutions are confronted with the problem that their institutions do
                     not have a centralized, supported center for digital humanities research and
                     pedagogy. Though this is arguably less problematic for established
                     practitioners, it can pose enormous challenges to students and to researchers
                     looking to embrace new digital humanities methodologies. At Stony Brook
                     University, individuals working with Geographical Information System (GIS)
                     technologies are supported by the university’s Geospatial Center, which offers
                     consultations, access to GIS tools, and graduate coursework. However, the
                     absence of a dedicated digital humanities center means that researchers working
                     with other modalities risk isolation and confusion. Stony Brook University
                     Libraries, like many research libraries, has sought to remedy this lacuna by
                     working to become a campus leader in the digital humanities and a connector of
                     diverse practices from across disciplines. In support of this goal, the
                     library’s Digital Humanities Working Group is a group of librarians from various
                     sectors of the organization who have interest and/or expertise in the digital
                     humanities: 
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>The Digital Humanities Working Group guides
                           library engagement in digital humanities work on campus, with an emphasis on
                           the ways in which the University Libraries can provide leadership and vision
                           in this dynamic area of inquiry. The Working Group plans programming, offers
                           a framework for research consultations, and works with liaisons to engage
                           with faculty and students on teaching, learning, and research activities in
                           the digital humanities. [<a class="ref" href="#workinggroupcharge">Working Group Charge</a>]
                        </p>
                     </blockquote>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p20">20</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p20">Working group members possess expertise in a variety of fields, such as
                     humanities, scholarly communication, library technology, web development, and
                     digital project creation. This interdisciplinarity contributes to the kinds of
                     services the group is capable of providing, while also creating a crucible in
                     which ideas about the Libraries’ role in the digital humanities are formed. By
                     engaging members of the library faculty from diverse areas of the organization,
                     the working group model problematizes the notion that the digital humanities
                     must exist as only one department of an academic library. Instead, this
                     inherently interdisciplinary, multimodal field of inquiry can be productively
                     situated at the crossroads of a variety of areas of librarianship. This kind of
                     flexibility also permits a reexamination of the digital humanities in the
                     library as it places it in dialogue with key library and information concepts
                     such as open access, information literacy, and scholarly communication. The
                     group’s inception in the fall of 2017 marks an important step in the library’s
                     journey as a digital humanities organization capable of providing leadership,
                     support, and enrichment to the campus community. However, it is also in many
                     ways the culmination of earlier efforts to build relationships with faculty and
                     students working in the digital humanities, and to use the Libraries’ status as
                     an interdisciplinary locus for scholarly communication as a platform for the
                     creation of a network of digital humanities practitioners at Stony Brook
                     University. This work began with a desire to understand the digital humanities
                     as they existed on campus, as well as to explore the potential role of the
                     library.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Engagement Strategies: Putting Theory into Practice</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p21">21</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p21">The liaison model which has characterized library outreach and academic
                     engagement for the past several years has important implications for extending
                     library work to the digital humanities. The liaison concept is predicated on the
                     idea that librarians will work with assigned departments or programs. However,
                     many libraries have extended this concept to a more functional model in which
                     librarians work with researchers, teachers, and students at key points
                     throughout their research, teaching, and learning process. These concepts
                     include emerging library competencies such as research data management,
                     bibliometrics, and the digital humanities [<a class="ref" href="#brantley2017">Brantley 2017</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#gibson2010">Gibson 2010</a>]. This presents a challenge to librarians related to
                     both expertise and visibility, namely, the need to communicate to their
                     constituencies the library’s potential as a resource in areas in which the
                     library has not, traditionally, played a strong role.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p22">22</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p22">Librarians at Stony Brook University and elsewhere have used diverse strategies
                     to engage with digital humanities scholars and to build community. For two years
                     librarians at Stony Brook University Libraries have hosted biannual Open Mic
                     events for digital humanities researchers, teachers, and students on campus.
                     Inspired by a desire to better serve digital humanists with existing projects,
                     these events were designed as a platform to connect scholars and students with
                     nascent projects to library-supported and open access resources, and to one
                     another. For the Libraries, each Open Mic was an opportunity to understand the
                     scope and practices of the digital humanities community at Stony Brook, and to
                     identify ways to make meaningful interventions.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p23">23</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p23">The Open Mic events were scheduled during daytime hours in the SBU Libraries
                     Center for Scholarly Communication, a flexible, presentation technology-equipped
                     space seating 28. The first Digital Humanities Open Mic event was held on March
                     5, 2016. In developing the event, the librarians organizing it began by reaching
                     out to Stony Brook University faculty known to be interested or engaged in
                     digital humanities activities and scholarship. The digital humanities at Stony
                     Brook University is a community without an institutional center, so identifying
                     likely event participants was an opportunity for the organizers to
                     “sound the murky depths” and map the rough shape and
                     range of the digital humanities at Stony Brook University, while discovering the
                     individuals situated in that space by interest, practice or scholarship. There
                     was a three-pronged call to participate or attend: Direct invitation to a
                     selection of known digital humanities researchers; an open invitation broadcast
                     to the myriad humanities departments and programs; and promotion, open
                     invitation on the library website.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p24">24</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p24">Five digital humanities researchers were identified and invited. Though none of
                     them were able to attend the event they all expressed interest in attending
                     future events. Two of them took the invitation as an opportunity to schedule
                     meetings with the event organizers and discuss library support for their work.
                     One discussion led to a collaboration between the researcher and the event
                     organizers and other librarians on a grant application for funding a digital
                     humanities project. The other discussion resulted in the development of a
                     course-integrated library workshop for the other researcher on digital
                     humanities resources and technologies.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p25">25</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p25">The open invitation included an online sign-up form for both attendance and
                     presentation. Three sign-ups were collected, one for attendance and two for
                     presentation. Those two presentations combined with three presentations from
                     librarians were the makings of an hour-long event. Though the event organizers
                     were uncertain of who would attend besides the participants and a small number
                     of librarians and library staff, they were confident that the open mic would
                     bring a spotlight to digital humanities and introduce to the SBU digital
                     humanities community the library as an active, engaged member.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p26">26</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p26">Though one of the scheduled presenters was a no-show, the other presentations
                     each went longer than 10 minutes and were further extended by discussion and
                     questions from the audience. In the end, three presentations (see Appendix 1)
                     were made and the event went slightly overtime. The presentations all included
                     demonstrations of ongoing projects using different technologies and offering
                     different features and experiences for students and researchers, and represented
                     diverse disciplines and wide-ranging materials and content. Considering the
                     diversity of the presentations and the different disciplines they represented,
                     the event was an effective introduction to the complex, interdisciplinary and
                     far-ranging qualities of digital humanities.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p27">27</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p27">The impact of the first Digital Humanities Open Mic can be assessed through a few
                     lenses, including the contacts made with the researchers who were unable to
                     attend but nevertheless welcomed the invitation as beginning of collaborations
                     with the library. Following the first successful open mic event, the University
                     Libraries organized a second event to appeal to scholars who may not have been
                     able to attend the first one, or whose work had progressed in the interim.
                     Several researchers working in the digital humanities had contacted the event
                     organizers, and the level of interest was sufficient to support the creation of
                     a second open mic event. Additionally, the notion of continuity was particularly
                     important as it emphasized the role of the Libraries as partner and consultant
                     in the work of digital humanities at Stony Brook University. The organizers
                     employed the same publicity strategies as for the first Open Mic, with the
                     advantage of nascent name recognition for the event among the digital humanities
                     community at Stony Brook University.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p28">28</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p28">The second Digital Humanities Open Mic event was held at Stony Brook University
                     on October 31, 2016. In marked contrast to the spring session, this Open Mic
                     attracted a number of participants who were new to the digital humanities, along
                     with a few who had active projects. One attendee brought the technical,
                     empirical perspective of a researcher trained in data visualization methods
                     outside of the context of the digital humanities. The diversity of this event
                     was unforeseen because, as with the first Open Mic, participants were not
                     universally screened or queried in advance. Prior to starting the Open Mic, the
                     authors spoke informally with several participants and got a sense of their
                     needs, interests, and motivations.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p29">29</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p29">It became readily apparent that the participants were interested in learning more
                     about the digital humanities through a general discussion, before turning to
                     project presentations. Moderated by the organizers, this conversation helped to
                     tease out the salient points of the digital humanities as a diverse group of
                     practices, inquiries, and research priorities [<a class="ref" href="#kirschenbaum2012">Kirschenbaum 2012</a>].
                     Participants asked questions and demonstrated particular interest in the ways in
                     which digital projects and practices can inform more traditional modes of
                     research in the humanities and social sciences. This prelude was also an
                     opportunity to link the Open Mic to the work of other groups on campus, notably
                     the Stony Brook University Geospatial Center, which offers training in GIS
                     technologies.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p30">30</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p30">Following the group discussion, several scholars presented projects and
                     technologies as part of their work in digital humanities. This group combined
                     faculty librarians and graduate students, none of whom had presented at the
                     previous event. As had been the case the previous spring, the presentations
                     often exceeded the 10-minute lightning talk format. However, the template of a
                     presentation followed by discussion was altered to a more productive format, in
                     which attendees interacted with presenters to produce a joint presentation much
                     more conducive to feedback and enrichment. Because of the diversity of the
                     audience, presenters received feedback from a variety of perspectives concerning
                     new directions for their work. The informality of the open mic format permits
                     continual re-stagings and re-interpretations of these events in ways that can be
                     crafted to suit the needs of the digital humanities community at Stony Brook
                     University. This was particularly true of the second open mic event, which
                     relied less on presenter expertise and more closely followed the format of an
                     introduction to digital humanities priorities and methodologies.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p31">31</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p31">Building on the success of the first event, the second Digital Humanities Open
                     Mic increased the visibility of the University Libraries among digital
                     humanities researchers at Stony Brook University. Additionally, the second event
                     attracted much greater attendance from library faculty and staff, many of whom
                     were encountering the digital humanities as beginners. Though originally
                     conceived of as an outreach tool for non-library faculty, staff, and students,
                     the Open Mic events yielded the added benefit of raising the profile of the
                     digital humanities within the Stony Brook University Libraries as well.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p32">32</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p32">Informed by the experience of prior Digital Humanities Open Mic events at Stony
                     Brook University, the organizers elected to construct the third event in our
                     series following the same model as the first two. Rather than attempt to impose
                     a stricter format, we prefer to encourage open mic attendees and participants to
                     guide us in producing the event which is most useful to them. By understanding
                     that our researchers, teachers, and students work along a broad spectrum of
                     experience and comfort level with regard to the digital humanities, we equip
                     ourselves to better support them as they expand their research in this
                     field.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p33">33</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p33">The third Open Mic event was held on November 13, 2017. As with the previous
                     events, the third Open Mic was deliberately casual in order to foster discussion
                     and relaxed participation. Attendance was lower than the first two events,
                     however, the presence of an undergraduate was a welcomed development, and an
                     indication that interest in and curiosity about digital humanities is coalescing
                     around the Open Mic events. There was a stimulating balance of presentation and
                     engaged discussion that in some ways delivered on our original expectations when
                     developing the Open Mic events.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p34">34</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p34">Each Open Mic event has had its own distinct character, shaped in part by the
                     style, subject and content of the presentations, and perhaps even more by the
                     participation, questions and interests of the audience. The ultimate success of
                     each of these events can be measured in the subsequent requests for consultation
                     and instruction which demonstrate the fact that the Open Mic events raised the
                     visibility of the Libraries as a source of digital humanities expertise on
                     campus, and that they helped to condition the kinds of services and programs
                     offered to meet and expand current needs.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Conclusion</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p35">35</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p35">Why is the library uniquely situated to offer these services? The
                     interdisciplinarity of the library and the flexibility of its services, spaces,
                     and collections conditions its responsiveness to the needs of diverse
                     stakeholders within the digital humanities community. The library’s role in
                     teaching information literacy through instruction sessions, workshops, and
                     consultations dovetails with the need to communicate digital humanities
                     practices to students learning to incorporate them into their research process.
                     The library is uniquely suited to do this because it exists outside of the
                     student’s department in a way which allows it to support research and scholarly
                     inquiry removed from the constraints of disciplinary convention. Likewise, the
                     library’s flexibility regarding the communication of information — seen in
                     research guides, tutorials, videos, and more traditional forms of scholarship —
                     positions it well to work with students who are interested in disseminating
                     their scholarship through the multimodal methods offered by and through digital
                     humanities practices. Finally, by engaging students working in the digital
                     humanities, the library has an opportunity to serve its mission of contributing
                     to students’ intellectual and professional development in a way which is
                     consistent with its broader goal of promoting critical engagement with
                     information.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p36">36</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p36">Researchers benefit from the library’s digital humanities services and support
                     through access to collections curated in order to facilitate technological
                     engagement, as well as equipment and consultations intended to assist in the
                     integration of digital humanities practices into their scholarship and pedagogy.
                     This is an important opportunity for the library to engage with digital teaching
                     practices. Additionally, the library’s increasing participation in all aspects
                     of the research lifecycle positions it perfectly to help scholars to blend their
                     digital humanities work with their broader research project. Finally, the
                     library’s programming mission provides a forum for researchers to share their
                     work with an interdisciplinary community outside of departmental boundaries. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p37">37</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p37">The creation of a robust menu of services, responsive collections, and flexible
                     spaces in support of the digital humanities is enriching for both the library
                     and librarians. The digital humanities provides an opportunity to conceptualize
                     library collections in innovative ways and to tailor library instruction and
                     consultations to this multifaceted field. As a component of librarian
                     professional development, digital humanities work encompasses several key
                     competencies, including digital practices and tools, collection strategy,
                     project management, academic engagement, and event planning. The diversity of
                     librarians’ training, academic backgrounds, and professional interests pair well
                     with the acquisition of digital humanities expertise, enriching the practice of
                     a fundamentally interdisciplinary, intersectional, and multimodal field of
                     scholarly inquiry. Resource-light, iterative programming, such as the Open Mic
                     events, allow the library to identify digital humanities practitioners and to
                     create a community of shared interest capable of serving the needs of students,
                     faculty, and librarians.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Appendix 1</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p38">38</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p38">Kasten, Kathleen; Chase, Darren; Costello, Laura; Haugh, Dana. <cite class="title italic">Digital Humanities at Stony Brook University.</cite> Library
                     Subject &amp; Research Guides, Stony Brook University Libraries. <a href="http://guides.library.stonybrook.edu/dh" onclick="window.open('http://guides.library.stonybrook.edu/dh'); return false" class="ref">http://guides.library.stonybrook.edu/dh</a>.
                  </div>
                  
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">Open Mic 1 Presentations</h2>
                     
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p39">39</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p39">Chase, Darren. “Hello from the Children of Planet Earth:
                        The Voyager Interstellar Mission Golden Record.” Digital
                        Humanities Open Mic, 5 March 2016. Center for Scholarly Communication, Stony
                        Brook University. <a href="http://scalar.usc.edu/works/hello-from-the-children-of-planet-earth/index" onclick="window.open('http://scalar.usc.edu/works/hello-from-the-children-of-planet-earth/index'); return false" class="ref">http://scalar.usc.edu/works/hello-from-the-children-of-planet-earth/index</a>.
                     </div>
                     
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p40">40</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p40">Haugh, Dana. “The John Milton Digital Library.”
                        Digital Humanities Open Mic, 5 March 2016. Center for Scholarly
                        Communication, Stony Brook University. <a href="http://thechosenseed.weebly.com/" onclick="window.open('http://thechosenseed.weebly.com/'); return false" class="ref">http://thechosenseed.weebly.com/</a>.
                     </div>
                     
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p41">41</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p41">Melgosa, Adrian and Sung-Gheel Jang, Natalia Chamorro, Jose Chueca. “Latino Long Island: A Cultural and Social Map.”
                        Digital Humanities Open Mic, 5 March 2016. Center for Scholarly
                        Communication, Stony Brook University. <a href="http://stonybrook.maps.arcgis.com/apps/MapSeries/index.html?appid=eed98716c97c4aa2b18fea18bc571273" onclick="window.open('http://stonybrook.maps.arcgis.com/apps/MapSeries/index.html?appid=eed98716c97c4aa2b18fea18bc571273'); return false" class="ref">http://stonybrook.maps.arcgis.com/apps/MapSeries/index.html?appid=eed98716c97c4aa2b18fea18bc571273</a>.
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">Open Mic 2 Presentations</h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p42">42</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p42">Datema, Jay. “Markdown for Interoperability.”
                        Digital Humanities Open Mic, 31 October 2016. Center for Scholarly
                        Communication, Stony Brook University.
                     </div>
                     
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p43">43</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p43">Kasten, Kathleen. “Voyant Tools.” Digital
                        Humanities Open Mic, 31 October 2016. Center for Scholarly Communication,
                        Stony Brook University.
                     </div>
                     
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p44">44</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p44">Zukowski, Scott. “Setauket’s Christian Avenue
                        Neighborhood (1873-1947).” Digital Humanities Open Mic, 31
                        October 2016. Center for Scholarly Communication, Stony Brook University.
                        <a href="https://stonybrook.maps.arcgis.com/apps/MapSeries/index.html?appid=bd1407516a43483e97c854eea5319c3f" onclick="window.open('https://stonybrook.maps.arcgis.com/apps/MapSeries/index.html?appid=bd1407516a43483e97c854eea5319c3f'); return false" class="ref">https://stonybrook.maps.arcgis.com/apps/MapSeries/index.html?appid=bd1407516a43483e97c854eea5319c3f</a>.
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">Open Mic 3 Presentations</h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p45">45</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p45">Chase, Darren.“Introduction to <cite class="title italic">Six
                           Degrees of Francis Bacon</cite>.” Digital Humanities Open
                        Mic, 13 November 2017. Center for Scholarly Communication, Stony Brook
                        University. <a href="http://www.sixdegreesoffrancisbacon.com/" onclick="window.open('http://www.sixdegreesoffrancisbacon.com/'); return false" class="ref">http://www.sixdegreesoffrancisbacon.com/</a>.
                     </div>
                     
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p46">46</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p46">Teplitsky, Joshua. “Footprints: Jewish Books Through Time
                        and Place.” Digital Humanities Open Mic, 13 November 2017. Center
                        for Scholarly Communication, Stony Brook University.
                        <a href="https://footprints.ccnmtl.columbia.edu/" onclick="window.open('https://footprints.ccnmtl.columbia.edu/'); return false" class="ref">https://footprints.ccnmtl.columbia.edu/</a>.
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
               
            </div>
            
            <div id="worksCited">
               <h2>Works Cited</h2>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="d4e532">
                     <!-- close --></span></div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="andrews2014">
                     <!-- close -->Andrews 2014</span> Andrews, E. “‘Ignore Them and They Will Come’: Attracting Students to Academic Library
                  Events,”
                  <cite class="title italic">Public Services Quarterly</cite> 10.2 (2014): 150-56.
                  <a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15228959.2014.904211" onclick="window.open('http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15228959.2014.904211'); return false" class="ref">http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15228959.2014.904211</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="brantley2017">
                     <!-- close -->Brantley 2017</span> Brantley, S., Bruns, T. A., and
                  Duffin, K. I. “Librarians in Transition: Scholarly
                  Communication Support as a Developing Core Competency.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Journal of Electronic Resources Librarianship</cite> 29.3
                  (2017): 137-150. DOI: <a href="10.1080/1941126X.2017.1340718" onclick="window.open('10.1080/1941126X.2017.1340718'); return false" class="ref">10.1080/1941126X.2017.1340718</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="gibson2010">
                     <!-- close -->Gibson 2010</span> Gibson, C. and Coniglio, J. W. “The New Liaison Librarian: Competencies for the 21st Century
                  Academic Library.” In S. Walter and K. Williams (eds), <cite class="title italic">The Expert Library: Staffing, Sustaining, and Advancing the
                     Academic Library in the 21st Century.</cite> Association of College and
                  Research Libraries, Chicago (2010), pp. 93-126.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="gold2012">
                     <!-- close -->Gold 2012</span> Gold, M. K. (ed). <cite class="title italic">Debates in the Digital Humanities.</cite> University of Minnesota Press,
                  Minneapolis (2012).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="gold2016">
                     <!-- close -->Gold 2016</span> Gold, M. K. and Klein, L. F. (eds). <cite class="title italic">Debates in the Digital Humanities.</cite> University of
                  Minnesota Press, Minneapolis (2016).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="green2014">
                     <!-- close -->Green 2014</span> Green, H. E. “Facilitating Communities of Practice in Digital Humanities: Librarian
                  Collaborations for Research and Training in Text Encoding,”
                  <cite class="title italic">Library Quarterly</cite>, 84.2 (2014): 219-234.
                  <a href="https://doi.org/10.1086/675332" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.1086/675332'); return false" class="ref">https://doi.org/10.1086/675332</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="grundy2015">
                     <!-- close -->Grundy 2015</span> Gundy, A. H., Braunstein, L, and
                  Golomb, L. (eds). <cite class="title italic">Digital Humanities in the Library:
                     Challenges and Opportunities for Subject Specialists.</cite> The
                  Association of College and Research Libraries (2015).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="kirschenbaum2012">
                     <!-- close -->Kirschenbaum 2012</span>  Kirschenbaum, M. (2012).
                  “What is Digital Humanities and What’s It Doing in
                  English Departments?” In M. K. Gold (ed), <cite class="title italic">Debates in the Digital Humanities.</cite> Minneapolis: University of
                  Minnesota Press (2012), pp. 3-11.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="nalanimeulemans2013">
                     <!-- close -->Nalani Meulemans 2013</span> Nalani Meulemans,
                  Y., and Carr, A. “Not at Your Service: Building Genuine
                  Faculty-librarian Partnerships,”
                  <cite class="title italic">Reference Services Review</cite> 41.1 (2013):
                  80-90.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="nowviskie2013">
                     <!-- close -->Nowviskie 2013</span> Nowviskie, B. “Skunks in the Library: A Path to Production for Scholarly
                  R&amp;D,”<cite class="title italic">Journal of Library
                     Administration</cite> 53.1 (2013): 53-66.
                  <a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01930826.2013.756698" onclick="window.open('http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01930826.2013.756698'); return false" class="ref">http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01930826.2013.756698</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="posner2013">
                     <!-- close -->Posner 2013</span> Posner, M. “No
                  Half Measures: Overcoming Common Challenges to Doing Digital Humanities in
                  the Library,”
                  <cite class="title italic">Journal of Library Administration</cite> 53.1 (2013):
                  43-52. <a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01930826.2013.756694" onclick="window.open('http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01930826.2013.756694'); return false" class="ref">http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01930826.2013.756694</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="rasmussen2017">
                     <!-- close -->Rasmussen 2017</span> Rasmussen, H., Croxall, B., and
                  Otis, J. “Exploring How and Why Digital Humanities Is Taught
                  in Libraries.” In J. Reeves Eyre, J. C. Maclachlan, and C. Williford
                  (eds), <cite class="title italic">A Splendid Torch: Learning and Teaching in Today’s
                     Academic Libraries.</cite> Council on Library and Information Resources
                  (2017), pp. 69-88. Retrieved from
                  <a href="https://www.clir.org/pubs/reports/pub174" onclick="window.open('https://www.clir.org/pubs/reports/pub174'); return false" class="ref">https://www.clir.org/pubs/reports/pub174</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="sula2013">
                     <!-- close -->Sula 2013</span> Sula, C. A. “Digital
                  Humanities and Libraries: A Conceptual Model,”
                  <cite class="title italic">Journal of Library Administration</cite> 53.1 (2013):
                  10-26. <a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01930826.2013.756680" onclick="window.open('http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01930826.2013.756680'); return false" class="ref">http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01930826.2013.756680</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="svensson2012">
                     <!-- close -->Svensson 2012</span> Svensson, P. (2012). “Envisioning the Digital Humanities.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Digital Humanities Quarterly</cite> 6.1 (2012).
                  <a href="http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/6/1/000112/000112.html" onclick="window.open('http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/6/1/000112/000112.html'); return false" class="ref">http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/6/1/000112/000112.html</a></div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="vandegrift2013">
                     <!-- close -->Vandegrift 2013</span> Vandegrift, M., and Varner,
                  S. “Evolving in Common: Creating Mutually Supportive
                  Relationships between Libraries and the Digital Humanities,”
                  <cite class="title italic">Journal of Library Administration</cite> 53.1 (2013):
                  67-78. <a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01930826.2013.756699" onclick="window.open('http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01930826.2013.756699'); return false" class="ref">http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01930826.2013.756699</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="workinggroupcharge">
                     <!-- close -->Working Group Charge</span> “Working Groups”
                  <cite class="title italic">Stony Brook University Libraries</cite>
                  <a href="http://library.stonybrook.edu/about-us/library-working-groups/" onclick="window.open('http://library.stonybrook.edu/about-us/library-working-groups/'); return false" class="ref">http://library.stonybrook.edu/about-us/library-working-groups/</a>.
               </div>
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar"><a href="#">Preview</a>  |  <span style="color: grey">XML</span> |  <a href="#" onclick="javascript:window.print();" title="Click for print friendly version">Print Article</a></div>
         </div>
      </div>
   </body>
</html>