<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
      <title>[PREVIEW] DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly: </title>
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_screen.css" media="screen" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_print.css" media="print" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" /><style type="text/css">
        #mainContent {
          float: none;
          padding-top: 2em;
          padding-left: 4em;
          padding-right: 4em;
          margin-left: 225px;
           
        }</style></head>
   <body>
      <div id="mainContent">
         <div class="DHQarticle">
            <div id="pubInfo">Preview<br />Volume  Number 
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar">
               <form id="taporware" action="get">
                  <div><a href="//preview/index.html">Preview</a>
                      | 
                     <a rel="external" href="//vol///000464.xml">XML</a>
                     
                     | 
                     		   Discuss
                     			(<a href="/dhq/vol///000464/000464.html#disqus_thread" data-disqus-identifier="000464">
                        				Comments
                        			</a>)
                     
                  </div>
               </form>
            </div>
            
            <div class="DHQheader">
               
               
               
               
               <h1 class="articleTitle lang en">The Chili and Honey of Digital Humanities
                  Research:The Facilitation of the Interdisciplinary Transfer of Knowledge in
                  Digital Humanities Centers
               </h1>
               
               
               <div class="author"><span style="color: grey">Mila Oiva
                     </span> &lt;<a href="mailto:milaoiv_at_utu_dot_fi" onclick="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('milaoiv_at_utu_dot_fi'); return false;" onkeypress="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('milaoiv_at_utu_dot_fi'); return false;">milaoiv_at_utu_dot_fi</a>&gt;, University of Turku (Finland)
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               <span class="Z3988" title="url_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;rft_val_fmt=info%3Aofi%2Ffmt%3Akev%3Amtx%3Ajournal&amp;rfr_id=info%3Asid%2Fzotero.org%3A2&amp;rft.genre=article&amp;rft.atitle=The%20Chili%20and%20Honey%20of%20Digital%20Humanities%20Research%3AThe%20Facilitation%20of%20the%20Interdisciplinary%20Transfer%20of%20Knowledge%20in%20Digital%20Humanities%20Centers&amp;rft.jtitle=Digital%20Humanities%20Quarterly&amp;rft.stitle=DHQ&amp;rft.issn=1938-4122&amp;rft.date=&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.aulast=Oiva&amp;rft.aufirst=Mila&amp;rft.au=Mila%20Oiva"> </span></div>
            
            <div id="DHQtext">
               
               
               <div id="abstract">
                  <h2>Abstract</h2>
                  
                  
                  <p>This article examines digital humanities (DH) centers as focal points of the
                     interdisciplinary transfer of knowledge. It is based on the assumption that the
                     manner in which the knowledge-transfer activities of DH communities are
                     facilitated affects the knowledge they produce. Following an analysis of eight
                     semi-structured interviews of directors, researchers, and administrators, the
                     article considers how DH professionals describe the facilitation of the
                     interdisciplinary transfer of knowledge in DH centers. It demonstrates that the
                     transfer of knowledge in DH centers is based on overlapping layers of organic
                     networks and stable organizational structures that support various kinds of
                     knowledge-sharing practices. The transfer of knowledge in DH centers combines
                     the exchange of ideas in the same physical space with online communication at
                     various levels, ranging from outside academia to the internal communication of a
                     research group. Further, the factors that enable information flow also have the
                     capability to restrict potentially meaningful information from entering into the
                     field. As a result, this article suggests that it is important to continue the
                     discussion on the boundaries for the transfer of knowledge in DH.
                  </p>
                  
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Introduction</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p1">1</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p1">Clicking repeatedly on the refresh button on the <a href="https://whatisdigitalhumanities.com/" onclick="window.open('https://whatisdigitalhumanities.com/'); return false" class="ref">whatisdigitalhumanities.com</a> web page reveals a new definition for
                     digital humanities (DH)<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e197">[1]</a> each time. Many of the definitions given by the over 800
                     participants in the <cite class="title italic">Day of DH</cite>, from 2009 to 2014,
                     state that DH has something to do with applying computational methods in
                     humanities research and teaching [<a class="ref" href="#whatisdigitalhumanities">What is digital humanities</a>]. In
                     the same way, the literature that ponders the character of DH points out that
                     the core of DH lies in combining these two approaches [<a class="ref" href="#terras2010a">Terras 2010a</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#kirschenbaum2010">Kirschenbaum 2010</a>]. While there are almost as many ways of
                     verbalizing the definition of DH as there are individuals involved in it, it
                     seems that many of us agree that DH operates in the intersection of what has
                     traditionally been considered to be humanities disciplines and computing.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p2">2</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p2">Therefore, it is valid to state that DH is a field that is rooted in
                     interdisciplinarity. The dynamics, challenges, and promises of DH all emerge
                     from the interaction of diverging disciplines and approaches. The
                     interdisciplinary character of DH emphasizes the social aspects of research,
                     where intellectual communication becomes an integral part of a research process.
                     The centers and laboratories that have been established in various universities
                     have become important nodes in the global “web of
                     DH,” owing to their ability to bring people together. These spaces
                     are focal points in the interdisciplinary transfer of knowledge, as they connect
                     humanities, social sciences, computer sciences, mathematics, and knowledge in
                     other fields to produce new understanding, host a multitude of projects, and
                     bring different departments and organizations together as part of a wider DH
                     network. One could say that DH centers are the hubs of DH, which both support
                     and gain their energy from the constant transfer of knowledge among various
                     actors.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p3">3</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p3">If transfer of knowledge is crucial both for DH centers and the field, how do DH
                     centers manage and facilitate the interdisciplinary transfer of knowledge? How
                     is transfer of knowledge promoted so that individual scholars gain an
                     understanding what is being done in the other disciplines, and collaboration of
                     interdisciplinary research groups has less obstacles? The practices,
                     facilitation, and organization of DH projects and communities have been gaining
                     increasing scholarly interest over the past years. The themes that encompass the
                     tasks and institutional models of DH centers [<a class="ref" href="#svensson2010">Svensson 2010</a>], the
                     best ways to manage DH projects [<a class="ref" href="#tabak2017">Tabak 2017</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#reed2014">Reed 2014</a>], the steps needed for establishing a DH community [<a class="ref" href="#galinarussell2015">Galina Russell 2015</a>], or collaboration and communication [<a class="ref" href="#vangorpandbron2019">Van Gorp and Bron 2019</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#matres2018">Matres, Oiva and Tolonen 2018</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#griffin2018">Griffin and Hayler 2018</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#keener2015">Keener 2015</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#siemens2011">Siemens 2011</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#siemensetal2011">Siemens et al 2011</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#deegan2011">Deegan and McCarty 2011</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#siemens2009">Siemens 2009</a>], have been topical in the ongoing discussion.
                     Simultaneously, interdisciplinary research and knowledge transfer within
                     organizations has been widely examined in management studies, thereby enabling
                     categorizations of the features of knowledge transfers [<a class="ref" href="#siedlokandhibbert2014">Siedlok and Hibbert 2014</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#krishnaveni2012">Krishnaveni and Sujatha 2012</a>]. These studies have provided important
                     information on the features of DH research and indicated factors that are
                     generally considered crucial in information transfers. However, thus far, it is
                     not very clear how the DH field facilitates interdisciplinary transfer of
                     knowledge and what this reveals about the field in general. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p4">4</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p4">Understanding the practices, structures, and the community underlying knowledge
                     construction — which knowledge transfer is a crucial part of — is important for
                     grasping what DH research is based on and its various nuances. Knowledge is
                     inseparable from the communities that create it, its context, structure, and the
                     means with which it is produced and shared. It is an ongoing social
                     accomplishment, constituted and re-constituted in practice [<a class="ref" href="#krishnaveni2012">Krishnaveni and Sujatha 2012</a>, 37]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#orlikowski2002">Orlikowski 2002</a>, 249, 253, 270]. Thus, the manner in which
                     DH communities function and in which their knowledge transfer activities are
                     facilitated influences the knowledge they produce.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p5">5</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p5">This article studies how DH professionals describe the interdisciplinary transfer
                     of knowledge that takes place in DH centers and what they see as the main ways
                     of facilitating these transfers. Responding to this research question
                     contributes to the discussions on the premises on which DH research produces
                     knowledge by exploring the field from the perspective of transfer of knowledge.
                     The underlying idea is that understanding how knowledge is transferred within
                     the field enables us to analyze what kind of knowledge DH research produces and
                     identify the potential limitations for our knowledge base. The ways we make DH
                     possible influences the ways we conduct research and, finally, the outcomes of
                     our research. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p6">6</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p6">The current study is based on eight interviews with DH facilitators in
                     (alphabetical order): Comhis Collective (Helsinki, Finland); HELDIG (Helsinki,
                     Finland); Northeastern University Library Digital Scholarship Group (from now on
                     NULDSG, Boston Mass., USA); NULab (Northeastern University, Boston Mass., USA);
                     and University College London Digital Humanities Center (from now on UCLDH,
                     London, UK).<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e263">[2]</a> The interviewees worked in different positions
                     in DH centers — they were directors, leading scholars, managers, and
                     administrators — and thus the expertise of the interviewees comes with different
                     perspectives toward facilitating DH research. The idea of the interviews was to
                     collect the experiences of DH facilitators and practitioners and analyze how
                     they describe the organizational, infrastructure and practice based obstacles
                     for DH research, and their solutions to overcome them. The overarching question
                     of the semi-structured interviews was “how does your
                     center/group facilitate DH research?” excavated by detailed questions
                     on the everyday practices of the institution. The used analysis method was
                     thematic analysis with inductive essentialist approach [<a class="ref" href="#braun2006">Braun and Clarke 2006</a>]. Following this approach, the article identifies platforms of and recurrent
                     practices and obstacles related to transfer of knowledge in the interviews. The
                     small sample of interviews, even if collected in three countries, does not
                     represent all the DH centers or even all the aspects of the studied centers.
                     However, being experienced and well-networked DH professionals working in
                     thriving DH centers, the interviewees’ visions related to the field furthers the
                     discussion on how the ways DH is facilitated affects the outcomes of the field.
                     
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Interdisciplinary DH and Transfer of Knowledge</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p7">7</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p7">
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>I think that one of the most interesting results [of the
                           NULab] are some of the unexpected results of the crossed collaboration that
                           has come out of it.[Interview with Ryan Cordell]
                        </p>
                     </blockquote>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p8">8</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p8">When describing the activities at the NULab Ryan Cordell drew a picture of
                     interdisciplinary collaboration, where “people from computer
                     sciences work together with the people from English, people in political
                     science and journalism work together, folks from African-American studies
                     collaborate with computer scientists, [all] working together on
                     memes” [Interview with Ryan Cordell]. In fact all the interviewees
                     considered interdisciplinarity to be rooted in the core idea of DH research, and
                     the main factor that made DH research fascinating. Consequently, they described
                     the work in DH centers resulting from the activities of people belonging to
                     different disciplines, departments, and organizations [Interview with Élika
                     Orgtega] [Interview with Sarah Connell] [Interview with Eero Hyvönen] [Interview
                     with Caroline Klibanoff] [Interview with Mikko Tolonen] [Interview with Melissa
                     Terras] [Interview with David Beavan].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p9">9</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p9">DH centers, as understood in this article, are <em class="emph">spaces</em> manifested
                     through a variety networks, collaborations, organizational structures, digital
                     presence and occasionally, but not always, in physical premises [<a class="ref" href="#oivaandpawlickadeger2020">Oiva and Pawlicka-Deger 2020</a>]. Although the studied centers reside at
                     academic institutions, their physical “location” can be fluid
                     and non-bounded. Simultaneously, interdisciplinary research can be defined as a
                     mode of research that transgresses the traditional boundaries of disciplines and
                     is more extensive or powerful than the sum of the components [<a class="ref" href="#siedlokandhibbert2014">Siedlok and Hibbert 2014</a>, 197]. Research literature identifies
                     various forms of interdisciplinary research, and the typology of
                     interdisciplinary collaboration continues to be debated. For example, scholars
                     classify interdisciplinary research into <span class="hi italic">multidisciplinary</span>, <span class="hi italic">transdisciplinary</span>, and <span class="hi italic">interdisciplinary</span> research depending on the level and
                     process of integration of the participating disciplines [<a class="ref" href="#klein2014">Klein 2014</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#siedlokandhibbert2014">Siedlok and Hibbert 2014</a>, 198-199]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#huutoniemi2010">Huutoniemi et al 2010</a>, 83]. Regardless the intensity of
                     interdisciplinary integration, it seems that the first step required for
                     interdisciplinary collaboration leading to fruitful mixes of disciplinary
                     approaches, is the transfer of knowledge from one discipline to another. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p10">10</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p10">The concept of “transfer of knowledge” in its basic
                     form implies “conveyance of knowledge from one place, person
                     or ownership to another.” Transfer of knowledge does not imply
                     transfer of an entire replica of the knowledge to the receiver, as the knowledge
                     can be modified in the receiving unit [<a class="ref" href="#krishnaveni2012">Krishnaveni and Sujatha 2012</a>, 27].
                     Transfer of knowledge is a loose concept that has been studied in various kinds
                     of research that analyze activities between countries and organizations,
                     including within and outside academia [<a class="ref" href="#fullwood2013">Fullwood et al 2013</a>, 130].
                     Because of its fluidity, transfer of knowledge can also be used as an analytical
                     tool in studying the facilitation of interdisciplinary collaboration, such as DH
                     research. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p11">11</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p11">When discussing everyday interdisciplinary practices, the interviewees referred
                     to versatile activities of interdisciplinary transfer of knowledge, varying from
                     listening to talks held by scholars from other disciplines to integrated
                     collaboration and joint production of research findings. The reasons for
                     organizing all these activities lays in the ways we understand where
                     interdisciplinary research can lead us. The research literature reveals both
                     cynical and optimistic reasons for interdisciplinary researcher interaction.
                     Interdisciplinary research has been a fashionable buzzword in science and
                     innovation policy, where it has been assumed that increased collaboration leads
                     to increased productivity of scientific achievements and innovations. This has
                     led to expanded usage of the term in the funding applications, but not always in
                     research practice [<a class="ref" href="#siedlokandhibbert2014">Siedlok and Hibbert 2014</a>, 194]. In addition
                     to using interdisciplinary research as a label for being competitive in grant
                     calls, there is also genuine belief that only by going beyond the boundaries of
                     disciplines will we be able to understand and respond to the complex problems of
                     the world [<a class="ref" href="#podesta2013">Podestá et al 2013</a>, 40]. Furthermore, interdisciplinary
                     researcher interaction can profoundly change the premises of research [<a class="ref" href="#svensson2010">Svensson 2010</a>, 163]. According to the interviewees, the main
                     point of interdisciplinary transfer of knowledge was the potential of reaching
                     unexpected outcomes. For them, at its best, interdisciplinary collaboration
                     leads to new findings and forming new understanding. The experiences of the
                     interviewees demonstrated that the results of an interdisciplinary collaboration
                     can be more than the sum of the contributors and lead to outcomes that no one
                     could expect [Interview with Mikko Tolonen] [Interview with Ryan Cordell].
                     Interdisciplinary collaboration is the salt and pepper — and most likely also
                     the chili and honey — of DH research, that promises reaching for the
                     epoch-making findings.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p12">12</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p12">While there are high expectations for interdisciplinary collaboration,
                     implementing it in practice is not easy. The interviewees noted that the main
                     challenges of such a collaboration are related to divergent ways of
                     understanding issues, varying from the basic assumption of the preferred
                     outcomes of research and concepts, to more concrete questions of what makes a
                     paper, or how to name authors, and to different institutional and individual
                     expectations [Interview with Sarah Connell] [Interview with Melissa Terras]
                     [Interview with Ryan Cordell]. The challenges of interdisciplinary collaboration
                     have been discussed widely in different fields [<a class="ref" href="#podesta2013">Podestá et al 2013</a>]]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#romerolankao2013">Romero-Lankao et al 2013</a>, 35, 38]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#olson2014">Olson and Olson 2014</a>, 3-4]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#siemens2009">Siemens 2009</a>, 229], including DH literature. The latest
                     studies in DH have identified misconceptions and distrust among different
                     disciplines and schools, as well as structural and promotion-related obstacles
                     to collaborative research [<a class="ref" href="#keener2015">Keener 2015</a>, par 43]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#klein2014">Klein 2014</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#zorich2012">Zorich 2012</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#siemens2011">Siemens 2011</a>]. Obstacles often arise when differing disciplinary
                     cultures with distinctive practices need to achieve something together. At its
                     worst, attempted collaboration among various disciplinary cultures can lead to
                     collisions due to epistemological and methodological differences,
                     discipline-driven understanding of the context, and uneven technical skills [<a class="ref" href="#terras2010b">Terras 2010b</a>, 175-176, 183-184]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#siedlokandhibbert2014">Siedlok and Hibbert 2014</a>, 204]. In addition to the social
                     challenges for interdisciplinary understanding, the literature has identified
                     several obstacles for information flows in DH research, which result from
                     combinations of siloed organizational structures and administration, using
                     processes of digital tools that create bottlenecks in information flows, lack of
                     collaboration, differences in understanding among different disciplines, unclear
                     knowledge-sharing practices, and lack of continuity and maintenance [<a class="ref" href="#nygren2014">Nygren, Foka, and Buckland 2014</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#terras2010b">Terras 2010b</a>, 186].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p13">13</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p13">This brings us to the question that if transfer of knowledge is simultaneously
                     challenging and crucial for DH, how can we enable and support fruitful
                     interdisciplinary transfer of knowledge? In her interview, Élika Ortega offered
                     a path for finding a solution to the challenge of understanding gap between
                     disciplines. She compared the interdisciplinary research of DH to a wide
                     spectrum of perspectives, where scholars coming from different disciplines
                     reside — literature scholars sit next to anthropologists, while mathematicians
                     are located closer to computer scientists in the spectrum. According to Ortega,
                     it can be difficult to understand someone at the other end of that spectrum,
                     while scholars in neighboring disciplines are easier to understand: 
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>I think there are [problems in interdisciplinary
                           understanding]. [ — ] If we stretched out that spectrum, I guess some of us
                           [the DHers] would end up in one extreme, and some other would end up in the
                           other end, [ — ] but there are all of the steps in between. So, if this end
                           and that end are not necessarily communicating right away, then there are
                           steps to follow to one or the other, or to the middle point where that can
                           be sort of translated. And they translate little by little, like move
                           knowledge from one to the other. To move it through the spectrum. So, I
                           think it definitely happens, and the bigger the group the more that
                           happens.[Interview with Élika Ortega]
                        </p>
                     </blockquote>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p14">14</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p14">For Ortega, interdisciplinary research in DH is about a step-by-step transfer of
                     understanding along the spectrum, transmission of knowledge from one discipline
                     to the neighboring one, and onward from that. An analysis of the interviews of
                     this study reveals that implementing gradual transfer of knowledge requires
                     people with differing knowledge (actors), networks, and spaces facilitating
                     communication as well as motivation and supporting practices. The following
                     sub-sections of this article will discuss how these features support
                     interdisciplinary transfer of knowledge in DH centers.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">The Creation and Maintenance of Networks</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p15">15</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p15">The core of the interdisciplinary transfer of knowledge in DH centers are
                     networks. When asked about the main activities of the DH centers, the
                     interviewees described various methods of creating and maintaining
                     interdisciplinary networks to support informal communication and structured
                     transfer of knowledge. The first and most crucial step in enabling
                     interdisciplinary transfer of knowledge is to enable people from different
                     disciplines to meet and communicate with each other. All the interviewees
                     indicate that building and maintaining the network and ensuring that people meet
                     each other on a regular basis to share their thoughts and ideas are the core of
                     facilitating DH research. The DH centers enable this meeting of people by
                     organizing weekly meetings, seminars, talks, tutorials, workshops, office hours,
                     “speed-dating,” speaker series, hackathons, summits
                     compiling all local DH projects, and meetings of smaller groups and other less
                     and more formal meetings that bring people together. [Interview with David
                     Beavan] [Interview with Ryan Cordell] [Interview with Eero Hyvönen] [Interview
                     with Melissa Terras] [Interview with Sarah Connell] [Interview with Mikko
                     Tolonen] [Interview with Caroline Klibanoff]. When meeting each other, the
                     representatives of different disciplines discuss and share ideas that often
                     foster new thoughts [<a class="ref" href="#galinarussell2015">Galina Russell 2015</a>]. The networking
                     activities of DH centers are not necessarily different from other academic
                     environments, but because people come to DH from different disciplines, enhanced
                     attention must be given to getting people together, thereby making building and
                     maintaining networks more essential. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p16">16</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p16">The interviewed DH specialists indicated that they used various paths for
                     networking and sharing experiences and information in the community. Moreover,
                     they also added that numerous facilitators had carefully shaped the different
                     forms of the meetings to enable the highest level of transfer of knowledge.
                     Thus, one can say that they do not merely gather people together in the same
                     room and hope for the best but that they have created several routines or
                     practices that support the sharing of information. For example, at
                     Northeastern’s NULab and Digital Scholarship Group, administrators organize
                     various meetings so that there are moments where everybody talks and not only
                     the invited speakers [Interview with Sarah Connell].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p17">17</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p17">The transfer of explicit knowledge in DH centers takes place in courses and
                     workshops. A few centers offer consultation sessions on various themes, as well
                     as help students and scholars to launch projects that contain methods that are
                     new for them [Interview with Caroline Klibanoff]. Although formal education is
                     usually directed at students, there is also a need to learn new things among
                     scholars who have completed their formal education. Director of HELDIG, Eero
                     Hyvönen, indicated that they organize DH courses not only for students but also
                     scholars with the hope that the latter would update their knowledge and add new
                     elements to their knowledge base [Interview with Eero Hyvönen].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p18">18</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p18">Interestingly, numerous interviewees emphasized the importance of informal
                     meetings, although the centers also organize more formal event [Interview with
                     Ryan Cordell] [Interview with Melissa Terras] [Interview with Eero Hyvönen]. For
                     example, Ryan Cordell mentioned how he had learned new methods from informal
                     conversations with colleagues in other disciplines [Interview with Ryan
                     Cordell]. Thus, it appears that informal events ease the processes of becoming
                     acquainted with others and building trust as they allow free-flowing discussion
                     in a less hierarchical atmosphere, which contribute to the transfer of tacit
                     knowledge. Informal meetings may lead to something that the interviewees
                     described as “unexpected results of crossed
                     collaboration” [Interview with Ryan Cordell] [see also Interview with
                     Mikko Tolonen]. Along the same lines, Phillips et al. describe in this special
                     issue the “serendipitous accidents” as one of the key
                     engines of their lab [<a class="ref" href="#phillips2020">Phillips et al 2020</a>]. It appears that open and
                     unplanned interdisciplinary encounters foster unexpected results, which include
                     the promise and potential of interdisciplinary research.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p19">19</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p19">Further, the interviewees described how sharing information at various levels
                     translates into different kinds of activities in their work, such as learning
                     new methods, establishing new projects, teaching, etc. According to them, the
                     outcomes of the transfer of knowledge can assume many forms. A discussion with a
                     colleague can translate into a new angle in a research project, teaching, or
                     form the basis of a new invention. Things learned in a workshop can be
                     transformed into a grant proposal, applied to research, or implemented in
                     teaching [Interview with Ryan Cordell] [Interview with Sarah Connell]. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p20">20</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p20">The active networking — or “colliding”
                     (“törmäyttäminen” in Finnish) of people, as formulated by
                     Eero Hyvönen — is not an accidental activity. In fact, it is in the very core of
                     creating a thriving DH center. The goal of constant networking and communication
                     across disciplines is the establishment of interdisciplinary research groups,
                     which will be helpful when applying for funding. For Melissa Terras, 
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>[p]art of the thing is that it's good for people to meet
                           regularly, because if you have a chance to meet people in the seminars then
                           when the grant call comes in, then you will find more easily people to work
                           with grant applications, you can put people together with other people, you
                           can network when you know a lot of people, when you know a lot of people you
                           will be able to put together them when needed. So, the Center is set up to
                           be a mailman that helps people to get to know each other.[Interview with
                           Melissa Terras]
                        </p>
                     </blockquote>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p21">21</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p21">According to the interviewees, extensive and lively networks, promoted by active
                     linking of people, are an important aspect of “social
                     security”. Furthermore, they are also crucial for the center’s
                     survival in the academic world, where a great part of funding is competitive
                     project-based external funding. Therefore, the DH centers, for example NULab,
                     have created paths that support the establishment of successful research groups
                     from serendipitous interdisciplinary encounters in DH meetings and networking by
                     providing small “seed grants,” which, hopefully, lead to
                     receiving external research grants [Interview with Sarah Connell].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p22">22</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p22">Throughout the interviews, it became evident that the studied DH centers function
                     as umbrellas for loose, rather informal and dynamic networks of scholars,
                     students, librarians, museum experts, activists, and university administrators.
                     When asked about the number of people involved in the activities of the centers,
                     the interviewees found it difficult to define exact numbers, because there is a
                     different number of participants in various events and the form and strength of
                     involvement of the people varies. Many of the interviewees identified layers of
                     involvement of people in the various activities of the DH center. They indicated
                     that some people are strongly involved in a research group, while others may be
                     more actively participating, for example, in a speaker series [Interview with
                     Sarah Connell] [Interview with Caroline Klibanoff] [Interview with Ryan Cordell]
                     [Interview with David Beavan]. In addition, partner organizations — such as
                     libraries, museums, and archives — can be integrally involved in research
                     projects, teaching, or participating in the open events [Interview with Melissa
                     Terras] [Interview with Eero Hyvönen]. Thus, thriving DH communities tend to be
                     larger than merely the “official” employed members of the DH
                     center, as they involve people with different layers of memberships and
                     networks. Out of these, the interconnections that can be called
                     “micro” and “macro” networks are
                     crucial for DH centers. 
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Interdisciplinary Transfer of Knowledge in Micro- and Macro-networks</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p23">23</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p23">The functions and purposes of transfer of knowledge vary in the different layers
                     of the DH networks. For an individual DH scholar, networks make learning what is
                     being done in other disciplines more reachable: if you know people from
                     different disciplines, it is easier to ask questions on new methods or
                     unfamiliar approaches when you encounter them. Simultaneously at the
                     “micro” (the collaborative research groups) and the
                     “macro” (the wider cross-institutional) layers of the DH
                     center the networks have different functions.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p24">24</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p24">The actual face-to-face everyday interdisciplinary transfer of knowledge in DH
                     centers takes place in the core units of research and working groups.
                     Collaboration on a particular theme facilitates the efficient transfer of
                     knowledge among participants. For example, Élika Ortega identified
                     interdisciplinary working groups focusing on concrete common themes as a good
                     way to start interdisciplinary collaboration: 
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>I don’t think
                           we have discussed [challenges of interdisciplinary collaboration] that much,
                           but we are looking into creating working groups based on salient things that
                           we could identify. Some people were talking that we could start a working
                           group on images, where people working with archival images, or memes, or
                           photography, let say. Then there was this idea to establish a social media
                           working group. So that’s the way that we try to bring our heads together
                           despite our… I don’t want to say differences, but … various profiles.
                           [Interview with Élika Ortega]
                        </p>
                     </blockquote>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p25">25</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p25">The micro networks of collaborative research groups, which enable recurring
                     meeting and discussion with representatives of other disciplines interested in
                     the same topic form the Communities of Practice (CoP). CoPs are informal groups
                     of people bound together by a common purpose and are considered particularly
                     good for facilitating transfer of tacit knowledge and informal circulation of
                     information [<a class="ref" href="#klein2014">Klein 2014</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#krishnaveni2012">Krishnaveni and Sujatha 2012</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#fragaszy2013">Fragaszy Troyano and Rhody 2013</a>]. People who participate in micro-networks learn,
                     in concrete terms, the approaches and understandings of scholars in other
                     disciplines, which is difficult to transfer through other means. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p26">26</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p26">The interviewees indicated various ways to prevent challenges in transfer of
                     knowledge in the micro-networks. As discussed earlier, the challenges of
                     interdisciplinary transfer of knowledge may include misconceptions, lack of
                     understanding, trust, or even respect arising from the differences in
                     disciplinary cultures. In addition, work in interdisciplinary research teams
                     comes with an integrated form of collaboration that can be new, particularly in
                     terms of humanists who are often trained to work alone [Interview with Mikko
                     Tolonen] [<a class="ref" href="#terras2010b">Terras 2010b</a>, 173]. In order to overcome the
                     challenges of interdisciplinary transfer of knowledge in research teams, the
                     involved scholars must understand and respect the diverging approaches of their
                     collaborators [Interview with Melissa Terras]. Thus, behind the façades of
                     sophisticated methods and shiny visualizations, the very core of a successful DH
                     team is based on the basic human needs of being recognized and respected,
                     besides the desire to expand scholarly knowledge. Furthermore, for facilitating
                     collaboration, the research teams need to have explicit discussions on the joint
                     goals of the project as well as the different ways of crediting in different
                     disciplines in order to ensure that everybody leaves the project with the
                     requisite “credits” [Interview with Ryan Cordell].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p27">27</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p27">Other scholars have also indicated that agreeing upon the modes of communication,
                     milestones, expected roles and obligations, means of conduct, and modes of
                     publication at the very beginning of a project can foster open communication and
                     prevent misunderstandings. Teams must devote time for the participants to build
                     trust and get to know each other so that they may work together efficiently. For
                     a DH project to be successful, there must be an emphasis on maintaining
                     communication, good human management, and sufficient face-to-face time [<a class="ref" href="#terras2010b">Terras 2010b</a>, 185, 187]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#siemens2011">Siemens 2011</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#suominen2018">Suominen 2018</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#taskinen2018">Taskinen, Kivimäki and Männistö 2018</a>].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p28">28</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p28">In addition to interdisciplinary transfer of knowledge in micro-networks,
                     communication across organizational boundaries is crucial for DH centers.
                     Building and maintaining networks beyond institutional boundaries, and even
                     outside the universities or academic circles, was considered important by the
                     directors and managers of established DH centers. Apart from university faculty,
                     a well-working DH network also includes specialists from libraries, archives,
                     museums, public and non-governmental organizations, and businesses [Interview
                     with Melissa Terras] [Interview with Eero Hyvönen] [Interview with Sarah
                     Connell].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p29">29</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p29">In order to attract people from other organizations and expand the borders of the
                     DH community, the events are usually open to anyone who is interested in walking
                     in. 
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>Many of our events are public, we have a lot of
                           researchers from other institutions. Occasionally we get real people from
                           the public, which is lovely when that happens, or sometimes professionals
                           working in industry, and things like that.[Interview with David
                           Beavan]
                        </p>
                     </blockquote>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p30">30</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p30">DH centers organize formal organizational meetings and industry advisory panels,
                     to which they invite representatives of different organizations; in addition,
                     they maintain the information flow through informal meetings. Melissa Terras
                     describes the breathtakingly wide networks that require active maintaining, but
                     are indispensable for the UCLDH: 
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>[--] we have an industry
                           advisory panel twice a year, so we have meetings with the British Library,
                           British Museum, National Gallery and range of other people… London
                           Metropolitan Archives and the industry hearing panels, so we have a whole
                           network. In addition to that I spend a lot of time, two or three hours a
                           week, just meeting people and hearing what's going on. There are a lot of
                           people from different institutions that I go out for coffee we just get
                           together and chat about stuff about what's happening so that I can keep
                           together these networks and if something happens. Often grant applications
                           [come at] a very short term and you need to make a project very quickly and
                           you need to know who am I going to call and ask to participate in the
                           project. Networking is very important. I think it takes a certain type of
                           person to do that and it takes a certain type of a drive to do that. It´s
                           important to know what is going on in different places.[Interview with
                           Melissa Terras]
                        </p>
                     </blockquote>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p31">31</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p31">As discussed earlier, interorganizational networking is crucial for enabling
                     information flow among people and for a prompt launching of cross-organizational
                     project applications. Moreover, keeping oneself updated on the developments
                     outside the university provides an important understanding of the directions of
                     evolution in the realm of digitality in a wider context.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p32">32</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p32">The physical context of the DH center — the city and the country in which it is
                     located — influences how the center regards external collaboration. The
                     existence of potential collaborative and rival organizations in close proximity
                     provide opportunities for collaboration and a background for comparison and
                     competition [Interview with Élika Ortega] [Interview with Sarah Connell]
                     [Interview with Melissa Terras] [Interview with Eero Hyvönen].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p33">33</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p33">Interestingly, the interviews reveal how location in a prominent city with
                     several major universities (such as Boston or London) and in smaller cities with
                     fewer local universities (like Helsinki) make the DH centers mindful about their
                     position. In major cities, the scale of comparison can be within the city, while
                     in smaller locations, the broader international context becomes significant.
                     
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>I guess another thing that has helped us here in this
                           particular context is… I mean Boston is a really weird city to do anything
                           academic, because there are, I guess 50 universities in the city. There are
                           the heavy weights, like the MIT and Harvard, who, I mean any normal person
                           is thinking that whatever I might be doing they are doing it better!
                           [laughs] Because it´s MIT and Harvard, right! That is interesting, and
                           obviously they are awesome in everything that they do, they have such long
                           and important institutional histories that they follow that they might not
                           be adopting newer trends as DH as readily. So that is where I think
                           Northeaster, our dean, and the NULab has made a big dent. In the absence of
                           having a big DH center in Harvard or MIT, and there are people doing it, and
                           doing it really well, although not as widespread as we do it here. So we
                           have had this opportunity to be competitive by doing this thing here, and we
                           have got the institutional support. I think that’s a higher level thinking
                           about the strategies.[Interview with Élika Ortega]
                        </p>
                     </blockquote>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p34">34</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p34">
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>Everything in Finland is so small that everybody understands
                           that we need to do things together, if we need to accomplish something
                           bigger. This is why we have been able to do bigger projects in Finland. [ —
                           ] This does not happen often abroad. One reason for that can be that there
                           are so strong players who can manage by themselves also. [ — ] This is why
                           we have created our agenda around the idea of a network so that we will
                           collaborate with all major institutions, and not so that the collaboration
                           would happen only within the university. [Interview with Eero
                           Hyvönen]
                        </p>
                     </blockquote>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p35">35</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p35">In the interview with the Finnish DH center, the collaboration instruments at the
                     level of the European Union — such as CLARIN and DARIAH — were mentioned as
                     important channels of collaboration [Interview with Eero Hyvönen]. In the
                     interviews with the US and UK DH centers, international collaboration was not
                     explicitly mentioned, although both institutions accommodate several
                     international projects. It appears that for centers in smaller countries,
                     comparable foreign organizations provide meaningful reference points. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p36">36</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p36">Further, the means through which DH centers facilitate the transfer of knowledge
                     in micro- and macro-networks are similar — “colliding” people
                     on a regular basis! However, the purposes of these networks are different. While
                     practical work on a joint theme enables transfer of tacit knowledge, the general
                     inter-organizational meetings also provide — in addition to potential strength
                     in funding applications — an important context for the center. Although the
                     networks are different, they are both crucial for the centers and they support
                     each other. 
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Organizational Structure – the Glue that Holds Together</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p37">37</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p37">Although the divergent, loose, and dynamic networks of interested individuals are
                     the core of DH centers, the organizational structures of the centers also have
                     an important role in facilitating knowledge transfers. The organizational
                     structures provide sustainability and continuity to the dynamic and
                     ever-changing networks. The employment status of the members of DH centers
                     varies and in addition to the tenure positions, a great number of people work
                     part-time or have short-term contracts. This creates instability and may lead to
                     situations where tacit knowledge, lessons learned, best practices, and even
                     knowledge on the methods or deeper understanding of certain data are lost with
                     dynamic changes [<a class="ref" href="#reed2014">Reed 2014</a>, par 26]. A concrete illustration
                     of this is that at least three of the eight interviewees have changed their
                     positions by the publication of this article. In DH, accumulated knowledge is
                     not stored only in publications but also in the logics of the methods and the
                     datasets employed. Although a lack of continuity and maintenance of knowledge
                     might not be crucial problems for an individual research project, it can create
                     knowledge gaps in the field in the longer run. Creating continuity by supporting
                     documentation, accumulation, and storage of knowledge in one way or another is
                     an increasingly important task of DH centers. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p38">38</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p38">The interviews did not address continuity directly, but they revealed many ways
                     in which the functions of the staff of DH centers support this. In addition to
                     the support for networking, the interviewees listed providing know-how through
                     networks, the ability to hint what needs to be addressed with specific
                     questions, sharing practical advice on how to begin and run a DH project, and
                     providing support in writing grants as crucial tasks. In many DH centers, the
                     coordinator works as a crucial node for maintaining and supporting, keeping
                     everything on track, and ensuring that communication works [Interview with Sarah
                     Connell] [Interview with David Beavan]. In addition, to the fact that they
                     “make the information flow,” they also seem to
                     function as crucial institutional memory of the organizations. As Sarah Connell
                     describes, 
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>[w]e are especially useful for being someone you
                           can contact with an idea and say “I want to do this and I don’t know how, I
                           don’t even know who else is doing this, I even don’t know if this has been
                           done four hundred times” and we’ll either know — because between the three
                           of us Elizabeth, David and me — we have a fairly diverse expertise, or we’ll
                           know who to ask. So, we are a good place for people who can’t see their next
                           step in digital research. [Interview with Sarah Connell]
                        </p>
                     </blockquote>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p39">39</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p39">The DH centers develop new resources for research and maintain a knowledge base
                     by listing available tools and informally sharing information and the best
                     practices of the uses of them. For example, the Comhis Collective (and other
                     research groups affiliated with HELDIG) produce new data sets, methods, analysis
                     pipelines, and tools with tutorials and e-learning packages that they are
                     sharing with others in the spirit of open science [Interview with Mikko Tolonen]
                     [Interview with Eero Hyvönen]. The codes, manuals, and information on the
                     developed methods, tools, data sets, and pipelines require maintenance. Since
                     research groups are often temporary settings, there is a need for institutional
                     and more stable settings that support external dissemination of the new
                     knowledge and ensure more stable storage of the documentation. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p40">40</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p40">For a DH center, resources, information on them, where they exist, and how they
                     can be used is fundamental for creating continuity through accumulated
                     knowledge. The resources are often scattered around university campuses, and DH
                     centers also pool resources with different institutions. 
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>[At
                           the Northeastern University] the infrastructure is scattered around the
                           campus. Some of it is at the neural sciences institute or at the library [ —
                           ] I think that is an advantage. Given all that, I don’t think that in big
                           institutions not all the infrastructure is going to be in one place. The
                           idea of distributed infrastructure is very useful. If you are going to try
                           something like that it would be useful to have an assessment of what kind of
                           infrastructure is [already] available and where [to whom], and who can do
                           what better, or more carefully. Because then the work can be done, and the
                           communications can happen in synchronous email or Slack, or regular meetings
                           monthly or so.[Interview with Élika Ortega]
                        </p>
                     </blockquote>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p41">41</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p41">In addition to the fact that the tools must exist, there is a need to spread
                     awareness of their availability with the help of lists and meetings. DH centers
                     require organizational structures and administration to keep dynamic networks
                     together, maintain organizational memory, and ensure continuity. Being points
                     that concentrate information on past projects, collected resources, and
                     available tools, the organizational structures of DH centers facilitate and
                     support the transfer of knowledge in the longer term.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Shared Physical Space as a Transmitter</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p42">42</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p42">The interviews with DH professionals reveal that although work in DH is about
                     handling digital data with digital tools, physical proximity is an important
                     factor facilitating the transfer of knowledge also in the DH field [see also
                     [<a class="ref" href="#siemens2011">Siemens 2011</a>]]. Sharing the same space is an important
                     transmitter of understanding, and it appears to be a response to the challenges
                     of interdisciplinary transfer of tacit knowledge. If, as suggested by the
                     research literature, the transfer of tacit knowledge requires interaction and
                     proximity of people [<a class="ref" href="#krishnaveni2012">Krishnaveni and Sujatha 2012</a>, 28], how do DH centers
                     actually provide it? 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p43">43</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p43">According to the experiences of the interviewees, proximity can be achieved in
                     different ways. Certain DH centers have permanent spaces dedicated for joint
                     meetings and workshops, lab spaces with special equipment, or office space for
                     the staff, while others arrange meetings at a variety of locations with no
                     single permanent physical space. At the time of the interviews, the Boston
                     NULab, NULDSG, and HELDIG had, or were about to have, their own spaces for
                     meetings and individual work. Simultaneously, UCLDH does not have its own
                     physical premises apart from one lab space, but the members of the network meet
                     regularly in various places. Even if DH labs would have physical spaces, often,
                     the majority of the affiliated people do not have offices there, as they might
                     work in their home departments or in libraries. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p44">44</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p44">Further, numerous interviewees considered the existence of a permanent physical
                     space as a crucial part of the center’s activities, although they described
                     different ways of organizing physical proximity as optimal [Interview with
                     Caroline Klibanoff] [Interview with Mikko Tolonen] [Interview with Sarah
                     Connell] [Interview with Ryan Cordell] [Interview with Eero Hyvönen]. According
                     to Mikko Tolonen, the possibility to surround oneself only with issues of
                     interest in the digital world can hinder fruitful encounters of unknown ideas,
                     which can happen easier in the analog world’s face-to-face encounters: 
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>In all kinds of development informal meetings are crucial. It
                           is not a coincident that the concentrations of know-how are often located in
                           a small area. It makes you to exchange ideas. [ — ] When people meet each
                           other, it may lead to something unexpected. In digital world you can
                           demarcate exactly the kind of bubble you want to, but [physically] you are
                           forced to meet [all kinds of] people when you are getting yourself a coffee.
                           [ — ] It is easy to establish different kinds of centers to the Internet.
                           You can just make a website and call it something, but it does not mean that
                           things will actually happen there. If you have some kind of physical
                           presence, it forces things to start happening! [Interview with Mikko
                           Tolonen]
                        </p>
                     </blockquote>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p45">45</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p45">Some interviewees emphasized the importance of joint space where people can enter
                     easily for facilitating informal exchange of ideas, thereby increasing
                     (interdisciplinary) communication. Being in the same room makes one actually
                     understand what is going on in there [Interview with Caroline Klibanoff].
                     Certain interviewees considered informal collective work to be the preferable
                     use of the joint DH space: 
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>The importance of people being
                           proximate to each other, that’s something that I think should be taken quite
                           seriously. [ — ] So, thinking about how we want things to work in the NULab,
                           we do want this space to be one for informal collective work. Where I’m
                           doing something on my computer and you are doing something on your computer
                           and then lean over, talk, talk, talk, go back to your own separate thing. We
                           will try to see if that happens organically, and if it doesn’t we are going
                           to make it happen [ — ] by scheduling some structured work time. [ — ] I
                           think that we are really still trying to figure out what’s the best way that
                           we can have this space help to make the community to take shape.[Interview
                           with Sarah Connell]
                        </p>
                     </blockquote>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p46">46</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p46">In addition to joint collaborative working spaces, the interviewees mentioned the
                     benefits of having (separate) offices located in close proximity to each other.
                     When asked about the benefits of belonging to the DH center, the interviewees
                     indicated learning from scholars in other disciplines by actively working with
                     them. One of the factors that they believed to promote such learning was the
                     location of office spaces in close proximity, which led to everyday
                     conversations and experimenting with new methods. For example, being located in
                     the same corridor encourages people to have quick conversations, which can be
                     more effective from the viewpoint of transfer of knowledge than long but rare
                     meetings [Interview with Ryan Cordell]. As an effect of proximity, “things start happening.” By establishing everyday micro
                     contacts and sharing small things, it is easier to understand the other person:
                     
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>I think proximity is important if you want to actually
                           work together. When we were separated, we got together and had our meeting,
                           and talked that we should work on this or that, and you go your separate
                           ways and you don´t see them again until the next meeting, and things just
                           don´t really happen. And there is awful lot of value, I think, in being in
                           proximity, you are by, you meet more often and start talking, and start
                           exchanging ideas. Even just with Ben over there [in the next office] we chat
                           a lot, get into debates, and the whole thing. I just think it´s useful,
                           there are things that can be done virtually, and things that just can´t.
                           [Interview with Ryan Cordell]
                        </p>
                     </blockquote>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p47">47</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p47">According to Eero Hyvönen, it is essential for a DH center to have physical
                     premises; at the time of the interview, HELDIG was on the verge of acquiring a
                     permanent space, with seminar rooms, collaborative spaces, and offices for the
                     core staff. However, not all the staff was to have offices there, and Hyvönen
                     stated that people in other departments could be crucial for spreading knowledge
                     of DH research [Interview with Eero Hyvönen]. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p48">48</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p48">Although a few interviewees emphasized the importance of physical proximity, not
                     all DH centers have set spaces or even feel that they would need such a space.
                     Having a “place of one’s own” can be useful, but it
                     is not critical if the center staff arranges alternative meeting spaces. The
                     UCLDH is predominantly a virtual center that does not have a set space. The
                     scholars have their individual offices in different parts of the university,
                     where they meet with their collaborators. The center organizes a host of events,
                     where people meet face-to-face, but they do not need a set “DH
                     space” for that [Interview with Melissa Terras]. Being located in
                     central London makes availability of physical space scarce. In addition, the
                     interviewees felt that having no physical space makes the organization nimbler,
                     more flexible, and interdisciplinary; this is because physical space also
                     implies additional responsibility, and more complex financial structures.
                     Therefore, there is no need for a physical space when a network already exists
                     and functions [Interview with David Beavan].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p49">49</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p49">At the level of research teams, physical proximity is not always possible. For
                     example, although the Comhis Collective is located in Helsinki, not all its team
                     members are present in the same premises or even in the same country. For them,
                     Slack and other digital collaboration tools enable the flow of information among
                     all team members. However, if there is a reliance solely on digital
                     collaboration tools, there is a threat that the persons who are not physically
                     present will not be aware of the latest developments. Therefore, in order to
                     make collaboration smooth, all the team members periodically get together in the
                     same space for days of intensive collaboration [Interview with Mikko Tolonen].
                     For teams working remotely, in-person meetings can be important platforms for
                     reviewing what has been done, planning future activities, and also for resolving
                     problematic questions that are difficult to solve through conference calls or
                     emails [<a class="ref" href="#reed2014">Reed 2014</a>, par 35]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#siemens2011">Siemens 2011</a>]. Physical meetings are often more necessary at the
                     beginning of a project, so that the people get used to each other. After getting
                     to know each other by being present in the same room, it is easier for the
                     scholars to engage in more informal communication, even online [<a class="ref" href="#podesta2013">Podestá et al 2013</a>, 44]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#siemens2011">Siemens 2011</a>].
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Digital Transfers of Knowledge Within and Outside the Community</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p50">50</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p50">In addition to physical proximity, digital communication tools are crucial for
                     transfer of knowledge in DH centers. The different layers of networks and the
                     level of integration of people at the DH centers are reflected in the uses of
                     divergent communication channels, varying between openly accessible to anyone
                     interested and closed usage of specific groups. The channels utilized — such as
                     email lists, Facebook, Twitter, Slack, Google Drive, Trello, and others — all
                     facilitate different kinds of communication and transfer of knowledge. Each
                     channel has different functions and follower potential, which influences the
                     kind of communication which they can be used for [Interview with Sarah Connell]. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p51">51</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p51">In addition to the technical features directing the usage of a digital
                     communication tool, each channel has a distinctive culture of communication that
                     one has to know to be able to communicate effectively. Certain channels
                     facilitate low-barrier informal communication more easily, which includes asking
                     “stupid” questions, while others contain more formal and
                     public communication. For example, the interviewees stated that a Slack channel
                     is a good means for low-barrier communication and asking questions, while a
                     list-serv — used by the same community — appears more suitable for disseminating
                     information, but nobody uses it for asking questions. Moreover, Slack’s
                     chat-like functions serve as a low-barrier connector [Interview with Caroline
                     Klibanoff] [see also [<a class="ref" href="#evalyn2020">Evalyn et al 2020</a>]]. In Slack, you can also see
                     all the people who are involved in the channel, while it is more difficult to
                     identify the recipients of an email sent to a list-serv. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p52">52</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p52">For internal sharing of information, discussions, and keeping things on track,
                     numerous DH research projects — the micro-networks of DH centers — use
                     internet-based communication tools like Slack, digital to-do lists like Trello,
                     and shareable Google documents [Interview with Mikko Tolonen] [Interview with
                     Sarah Connell] [Interview with Ryan Cordell]. 
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>Yes, there is
                           a lot of Slack! I think most of the individual projects have their own Slack
                           [channel]. [ — ] Different projects figure out their own communication
                           channels, but I think a lot of them are on Slack. [Interview with Ryan
                           Cordell]
                        </p>
                     </blockquote>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p53">53</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p53">Transfer of tacit, non-verbalized knowledge requires informal communication. It
                     is easier to share tacit knowledge when people are in the same location, but it
                     appears that collaborating teams that already know each other can maintain
                     sharing of tacit knowledge and emotional ties through digital communication
                     tools as well [<a class="ref" href="#krishnaveni2012">Krishnaveni and Sujatha 2012</a>]. Working together and knowing
                     each other for a longer period can give birth to a shared mini culture, where
                     the members of the group share the internal meanings of emojis or words [<a class="ref" href="#evalyn2020">Evalyn et al 2020</a>]. For example, Mikko Tolonen referred to the Comhis
                     collective’s Slack humor as an important component of collaboration [Interview
                     with Mikko Tolonen]. Tacit knowledge is often learned in shared collaborative
                     experiences, and learning tacit knowledge requires participation and
                     “doing”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#krishnaveni2012">Krishnaveni and Sujatha 2012</a>]. Moreover, transfer of tacit knowledge may be
                     possible if the tool itself and its code of conduct are familiar to users. In DH
                     research, explicit knowledge can be found in articles and on the Internet, but
                     tacit knowledge is received in close connection and collaboration with
                     colleagues. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p54">54</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p54">In practice, digital and physical presence often overlap and, occasionally,
                     transfer of knowledge can take place synchronously via physical proximity as
                     well as a variety of digital channels such as Slack, Google Drive, and Twitter.
                     
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>Often, even if we are physically present, we are
                           simultaneously digitally present. Even if we are in the same room, the
                           communication may happen in one of the chat options, Skype, or elsewhere.
                           [Interview with Mikko Tolonen]
                        </p>
                     </blockquote>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p55">55</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p55">Both digital and physical presence have different strengths and weaknesses in
                     transfer of knowledge. Physical proximity eases the process of getting to know
                     people and the transfer of tacit knowledge, and constant proximity makes things
                     happen faster and collaboration more efficient. Simultaneously, digital
                     communication tools make communication possible even over distances: a team
                     member can participate in a weekly meeting through Skype while being located in
                     a different country. In addition, it can also be easier to go back to earlier
                     conversations in a chat — although not too old ones, since they may be already
                     difficult to find in Slack for example —, and new people can join in a
                     conversation that was initiated a month earlier.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p56">56</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p56">The online communication within DH centers and macro-networks is vital for DH
                     centers. The centers studied here take internet and social media communication
                     very seriously [Interview with Melissa Terras] [Interview with Eero Hyvönen]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#terras2012">Terras 2012</a>]. 
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>We are digital first, which
                           means that we don´t really do off-line communication, we don´t do much print
                           communication. [ — ] But we want to have a very good digital presence, which
                           we take very seriously. We have a website, and Facebook and Twitter. [ — ]
                           We like to be creative in our design, within the limits of the content
                           management system we have to work with. We have a very good designer, who is
                           part of the team, who does all the work on the website. We keep our Twitter
                           feed up-to date, we keep our Facebook up-to date with all the activities
                           that we are doing. I think we have around 5 000 followers on Twitter. It´s
                           not a small thing. That means that with the digital presence, if something
                           happens [that we want to inform people of], with all the members of the
                           team, we can distribute a message to the potential audience of 30 000 people
                           within a second. We take that seriously. Any digital research facility
                           should take digital presence seriously. [Interview with Melissa
                           Terras]
                        </p>
                     </blockquote>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p57">57</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p57">Websites and social media are important tools for spreading information to the
                     public regarding the activities of a DH center. Thus, internet presence is
                     crucial for maintaining the public image of a center and providing members of a
                     community with a web identity [Interview with Eero Hyvönen] spreading
                     information regarding what DH is and what its impact is has become crucial for
                     establishing the field [<a class="ref" href="#galinarussell2015">Galina Russell 2015</a>].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p58">58</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p58">Websites and social media create channels for reaching out to new people
                     interested in DH and in potentially joining the community. In a discussion at
                     the NULDSG weekly meeting, numerous participants — in particular the younger
                     ones — stated that social media provided them with the first encounter with DH
                     and the people engaging with it. Having some knowledge of a DH center and its
                     people “digitally” before actually coming to the meetings was
                     a crucial first step for them. Without this connection, it would have been too
                     big a step to reach out and contact a DH center and its people, or move from
                     other parts of the country to Boston to become involved in DH. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p59">59</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p59">In addition to attracting new people, well-designed and active digital presence
                     is also of significance for obtaining funding and to be recognized by the larger
                     society. It is a means to determine how the funding has been used, what kinds of
                     activities the center holds, and if granted external funding, how
                     “well” it may potentially be used. Lack of an active
                     digital presence gives an impression of an outdated or inactive center. 
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>We are aware of the fact that blog posts as a publication genre
                           can sometimes be incredibly helpful. I’ve assigned about fifteen blog posts
                           as I’m teaching this fall because it’s the best, clearest and shortest way
                           to introduce an important and complicated topic. But sometimes a blog post
                           is just the obligatory one that takes way longer to write than it should,
                           and doesn’t end up having a lot of readership and doesn’t really benefit the
                           person who wrote it. So we try to think whether the blog post is the best
                           format to share a piece of information. We tend to use our blog posts partly
                           to share research and also because we do have a lot of events, and we often
                           get the “I wish I could go, but…”. We Tweet the
                           blogpost wrap ups, if you couldn’t go at all, you can at least see the
                           links, and get the sense what the talk was about.[Interview with Sarah
                           Connell]
                        </p>
                     </blockquote>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p60">60</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p60">However, maintaining active digital presence requires effort. Several people are
                     needed to support the distribution of knowledge from the DH center to the
                     outside world by maintaining a website and social media channels [Interview with
                     Sarah Connell] [Interview with Élika Ortega] [Interview with Caroline Klibanoff]
                     [Interview with Melissa Terras] [Interview with Eero Hyvönen]. For example, the
                     NULab travel funds require reporting on the conference or the event visited
                     through a blog post, which adds a variety of content to the site [Interview with
                     Ryan Cordell]. It is also preferable to share the social media post
                     responsibility to people who are more naturally inclined toward such
                     information, so that an active Twitter user posts on Twitter [Interview with
                     Sarah Connell], while a constant Facebook hang-around posts on Facebook. 
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Boundaries for Knowledge Transfer</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p61">61</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p61">In addition to the multilayered knowledge transfers powered by interconnected
                     face-to-face and online networks, communication within and outside DH centers
                     also has restrictions. When defining and creating a space (of communication), we
                     also set boundaries to it. The barriers to transfer of knowledge in DH centers
                     are physical, digital, language-related, structural, social, and cultural. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p62">62</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p62">Constructing a physical space invites certain participants but eliminates others.
                     David Beavan indicated, when discussing the absence of physical premises of
                     UCLDH, that while a physical space could increase communication among the core
                     members having offices in the space, it could potentially also restrict other
                     people’s access and cut them out [Interview with David Beavan]. Although, in
                     principle being open to the outside world, in practice access to the spaces of
                     the DH centers studied here is not easy for an outsider: for example, to enter
                     the space, an individual may need an access pass to the library, a key code, or
                     merely know how to navigate through the labyrinth of a university campus. It is
                     very unlikely that a person would enter these DH spaces accidentally. One of the
                     reasons for the practical restrictions is that open premises often demand that
                     someone is present to oversee that the space, which is often equipped with the
                     latest technology, is used for its intended purpose by the destined people.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p63">63</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p63">Similarly, while digital communication tools facilitate interaction, they are not
                     factually open to everyone. Certain channels, particularly those used by defined
                     groups, allow entrance only by invitation. Communication in a small, non-public
                     group is often easier and less formal and potentially makes exchange of ideas
                     smoother [Interview with Caroline Klibanoff]. Thus, absolute openness of all
                     physical premises and digital tools would eliminate the boundaries that make the
                     DH center identifiable and water down the safer closed spaces of communication. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p64">64</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p64">Although boundaries are necessary, it is important to discuss who and what kind
                     of knowledge we welcome. Is there knowledge that is left out from the
                     information flows? In recent years, the DH field has been discussing the need
                     for a variety of approaches and the threat of
                     “retro-humanism” focusing only on the canonical
                     representation of the humanities [<a class="ref" href="#risam2015">Risam 2015</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#martinandrunyon2016">Martin and Runyon 2016</a>, 20-21]. There is also strong advocacy
                     of the use of a variety of languages, exemplified by the use of multiple
                     languages at the DH2018 conference in Mexico City. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p65">65</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p65">Language creates bubbles of DH communities (this article is aimed at the English
                     language bubble) and determines hierarchies based on the competence and fluency
                     of the speaker/writer. Participation in international (English language)
                     communication demands special attention from the DH centers in a
                     non-English-speaking country. In order to enable smooth international
                     collaboration, the content on the HELDIG websites was written in English right
                     from the outset, and the expansion of the staff by including international
                     recruits pushed the Comhis Collective to change their operational language to
                     English. 
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>Until recently everybody in the Collective were
                           Finnish-speakers, but now almost all the new members come from elsewhere,
                           and we had to change our operating language and Slack humor [into
                           English].[laughs] [Interview with Mikko Tolonen]
                        </p>
                     </blockquote>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p66">66</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p66">In Finland, where academia is practically tri-lingual — using Finnish, Swedish,
                     and English — a change in the operating language is not a big problem. However,
                     it sets additional linguistic requirements for individual researchers who are
                     willing to enter the international scholarly streams of transfer of
                     knowledge.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p67">67</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p67">Alongside linguistic barriers, the underlying structures and logic of scholarly
                     crediting and financing influence the ways in which research is conducted, even
                     if, in general, the motivation of DH scholars to participate in
                     interdisciplinary transfer of knowledge is high. The widely discussed issues of
                     crediting for open-access publishing, opening up of the used code or data, joint
                     publications, or potential failures of tests (that are an integral part of
                     developing something new) are issues that can either promote or hinder
                     interdisciplinary transfer of knowledge and the ultimate emergence of new
                     knowledge. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p68">68</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p68">Therefore, social and cultural boundaries and the questions of who is invited to
                     a research group, whose knowledge is valued as important, or whose work we know
                     of are not issues that are solely related to DH; they are also related to the
                     larger academia and societies in general [<a class="ref" href="#griffin2018">Griffin and Hayler 2018</a>, par 11-12]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#ostling2018">Östling et al 2018</a>]. One can also ask to what degree are scholars
                     associated with the more well-renowned centers more likely to have their
                     knowledge more valued <em class="emph">because</em> of their association? The
                     interviewees, being integral participants in the DH field, did not extensively
                     discuss the issues of social and cultural boundaries. At the core, it is often
                     difficult to see the challenges in the margins; therefore, this study cannot
                     comprehensively cover this issue. However, a few reflections from DH
                     professionals may contribute important perspectives to the discussion. The
                     interviewees indicated that, to a great extent, DH is a question of
                     self-identification and a sense of belonging: 
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>DH is at this
                           point still a self-reported, or self-adopted title. [ — ] It is a conceptual
                           magnet. Once you identify yourself as a digital humanist, then you start
                           participating to the community. [Interview with Élika Ortega]
                        </p>
                     </blockquote>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p69">69</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p69">Because DH is about self-identification, it would be important to create an
                     atmosphere of openness that facilitates the inclusion of a variety of people
                     into the field. This would ensure that the interdisciplinary processes of
                     transfer of knowledge have sufficient variety to draw on. In other words, if
                     knowledge is inseparable from the communities that create it, use it, and
                     transform it [<a class="ref" href="#krishnaveni2012">Krishnaveni and Sujatha 2012</a>, 37], we must ensure that the
                     community is not too narrow. Further, if inclusion is the first step to
                     accessing equality, but not a sufficient one [<a class="ref" href="#martinandrunyon2016">Martin and Runyon 2016</a>, 37], further studies would be required on the effects of
                     infrastructures, practices, the general logic underlying information flow in DH,
                     and the varied nature of the DH community.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Conclusions</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p70">70</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p70">The interdisciplinary character of DH amplifies the social aspects of its
                     knowledge construction; therefore, it is crucial to study the means through
                     which transfer of knowledge is facilitated in this field. This article suggests
                     that transfer of knowledge requires people with varied knowledge, networks,
                     physical and virtual spaces facilitating communication, motivation, and
                     practices that support it. The interviews reveal that the studied DH centers,
                     the focal points of the transfer of knowledge of the field, combine the elements
                     of the transfer of knowledge in a variety of ways and, therefore, function as
                     engines of diverse information flows. DH centers facilitate interdisciplinary
                     and inter-organizational matchmaking and exchange of ideas by maintaining a
                     variety of networks and institutional memory as well as by providing physical
                     and digital spaces for exchange of explicit and tacit knowledge. Further, the
                     interviews indicate that in order to form a dynamic unit, in addition to the
                     top-down strategy-driven infrastructures, DH centers must nurture free-floating
                     networks of people [see also [<a class="ref" href="#fickers2020">Fickers and Heijden 2020</a>]]. Maintaining respect
                     for other perspectives and the willingness to learn and share new approaches is
                     crucial for the field. The questions of exclusion and inclusion, who is
                     recognized as a recognizable DH scholar, and what kind of information we value
                     are crucial for defining the kind of scholarship and research outcomes we wish
                     to achieve in the field in the future. The organizations running DH centers
                     should pay attention to these features, and adjust them to the specifics of
                     their cultural, geographical, academic and organizational environment. And, most
                     importantly, for each individual DH practitioner it is essential to consider how
                     our own practices affect the inclusiveness of transfer of knowledge in the
                     DH.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Interviews</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p71">71</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p71">[Interview with David Beavan] Associate Director for Research for University
                     College London (UCL) Centre for Digital Humanities (UCLDH) and Research Manager
                     (Arts and Humanities), by Mila Oiva, November 20, 2017, Skype.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p72">72</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p72">[Interview with Sarah Connell] Assistant Director of the Women Writers Project
                     (Digital Scholarship Group, Northeastern University Library) and the NULab for
                     Texts, Maps, and Networks by Mila Oiva October 17, 2017, Boston Mass., USA.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p73">73</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p73">[Interview with Ryan Cordell], Assistant Professor and Core Faculty member of
                     NULab at the Northeastern University, by Mila Oiva, October 16, 2017, Boston
                     Mass., USA.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p74">74</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p74">[Interview with Eero Hyvönen] Director of the Helsinki Center of Digital
                     Humanities HELDIG, by Mila Oiva September 20, 2017, Otaniemi, Espoo, Finland.
                     Translations from Finnish to English by Mila Oiva.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p75">75</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p75">[Interview with Caroline Klibanoff] Coordinator at the Northeastern University
                     Library Digital Scholarship Group (NULDSG), by Mila Oiva, October 11, 2017,
                     Boston Mass., USA.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p76">76</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p76">[Interview with Élika Ortega] Assistant Professor at the Department of Cultures,
                     Societies, and Global Studies and Core Faculty at the NULab for Texts, Maps and
                     Networks at Northeastern University, by Mila Oiva, October 17, 2017, Boston
                     Mass., USA.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p77">77</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p77">[Interview with Melissa Terras], Director of the University College London
                     Digital Humanities Center (UCLDH), by Mila Oiva, August 29, 2017, Skype.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p78">78</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p78">[Interview with Mikko Tolonen] Professor of Digital Humanities and Leader of the
                     Comhis Collective at HELDIG, University of Helsinki, by Mila Oiva, August 22,
                     2017, Helsinki, Finland. Translations from Finnish to English by Mila Oiva.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
            </div>
            
            <div id="notes">
               <h2>Notes</h2>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e197"><span class="noteRef lang en">[1]  In this article, I use the concept of digital
                     humanities for the sake of clarity, although the practices of culture
                     analytics, computational social sciences, and others come close to those of
                     DH.</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e263"><span class="noteRef lang en">[2] The transcriptions of the interviews and the interview
                     questions of <cite class="title italic">FSD3362 Facilitating Digital Humanities
                        Research 2017</cite> are stored at the Finnish Social Sciences Data
                     Archive <a href="https://services.fsd.uta.fi/catalogue/FSD3362?lang=en&amp;study_language=en" onclick="window.open('https://services.fsd.uta.fi/catalogue/FSD3362?lang=en&amp;study_language=en'); return false" class="ref">https://services.fsd.uta.fi/catalogue/FSD3362?lang=en&amp;study_language=en</a>
                     and available for research and teaching purposes. The interviews were
                     collected in connection to “From Roadmap to Roadshow: A
                     collective demonstration and information project to strengthen Finnish
                     digital history” project. The principal investigator of the KONE
                     Foundation funded project was Professor Mats Fridlund at the Aalto
                     University, Finland.</span></div>
            </div>
            <div id="worksCited">
               <h2>Works Cited</h2>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="braun2006">
                     <!-- close -->Braun and Clarke 2006</span> Braun, V. and Clarke, V.
                  “Using thematic analysis in psychology.” in
                  <cite class="title italic">Qualitative Research in Psychology</cite>, 3 (2)
                  (2006): 77-101.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="deegan2011">
                     <!-- close -->Deegan and McCarty 2011</span> Deegan, M. and W. McCarty.
                  <cite class="title italic">Collaborative Research in the Digital
                     Humanities</cite>. Ashgate, Farnham (2011).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="evalyn2020">
                     <!-- close -->Evalyn et al 2020</span> Evalyn, L., C. Henderson, J.
                  King, J. Lockhart, L. Mitchell and S. Conklin Akbari. “One
                  Loveheart at a Time: The Language of Emoji and the Building of Affective
                  Community in the Digital Medieval Studies Environment.” in <cite class="title italic">Digital Humanities Quarterly</cite>. Available from: <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000474/000474.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000474/000474.html'); return false" class="ref">http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000474/000474.html</a></div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="fickers2020">
                     <!-- close -->Fickers and Heijden 2020</span> A. Fickers and T. van
                  der Heijden. “Inside the Trading Zone. Thinkering in a
                  Digital History Lab” in <cite class="title italic">Digital Humanities
                     Quarterly</cite>. Available from: <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000472/000472.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000472/000472.html'); return false" class="ref">
                     http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000472/000472.html</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="fragaszy2013">
                     <!-- close -->Fragaszy Troyano and Rhody 2013</span> Fragaszy
                  Troyano, J. and L. M. Rhody. “Expanding Communities of
                  Practice. Introduction to the Issue.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Journal of Digital Humanities</cite> [Online], October 23,
                  (2013). Available from: <a href="http://journalofdigitalhumanities.org/2-2/expanding-communities-of-practice/" onclick="window.open('http://journalofdigitalhumanities.org/2-2/expanding-communities-of-practice/'); return false" class="ref">http://journalofdigitalhumanities.org/2-2/expanding-communities-of-practice/</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="fullwood2013">
                     <!-- close -->Fullwood et al 2013</span> Fullwood, R., J. Rowley and
                  R. Delbridge. “Knowledge Sharing amongst Academics in UK
                  Universities.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Journal of Knowledge Management</cite> [Online], 17(1)
                  February 15, (2013): 123–-136. Available from: <a href="https://doi.org/10.1108/13673271311300831" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.1108/13673271311300831'); return false" class="ref">https://doi.org/10.1108/13673271311300831</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="galinarussell2015">
                     <!-- close -->Galina Russell 2015</span>  Galina Russell, I..
                  “Creating a Regional DH Community — A Case Study of the
                  RedHD.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Digital Humanities Quarterly</cite> [Online], 9(3) (2015).
                  Available from:<a href="http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/9/3/000221/000221.html" onclick="window.open('http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/9/3/000221/000221.html'); return false" class="ref">http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/9/3/000221/000221.html</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="griffin2018">
                     <!-- close -->Griffin and Hayler 2018</span> Griffin, G., and M. S.
                  Hayler. “Collaboration in Digital Humanities Research –
                  Persisting Silences.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Digital Humanities Quarterly</cite>, 12(1) (2018).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="huutoniemi2010">
                     <!-- close -->Huutoniemi et al 2010</span> Huutoniemi, K., J. T.
                  Klein, H. Bruun and J. Hukkinen. “Analyzing
                  Interdisciplinarity: Typology and Indicators.” in <cite class="title italic">Research Policy</cite> [Online], 39(1) February 1, (2010):
                  79–88. Available from: <a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2009.09.011" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2009.09.011'); return false" class="ref">https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2009.09.011</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="keener2015">
                     <!-- close -->Keener 2015</span> Keener, A. “The
                  Arrival Fallacy: Collaborative Research Relationships in the Digital
                  Humanities” in <cite class="title italic">Digital Humanities
                     Quarterly</cite> [Online], 2 (2015). Available from: <a href="http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/9/2/000213/000213.html" onclick="window.open('http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/9/2/000213/000213.html'); return false" class="ref">http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/9/2/000213/000213.html</a>. 
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="kirschenbaum2010">
                     <!-- close -->Kirschenbaum 2010</span> Kirschenbaum, M.G.. “What Is Digital Humanities and What’s It Doing in English
                  Departments?” in <cite class="title italic">ADE Bulletin</cite>, no. 150
                  (2010): 1–7.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="klein2014">
                     <!-- close -->Klein 2014</span> Klein, J. T. <cite class="title italic">Interdisciplining Digital Humanities: Boundary Work In An Emerging
                     Field</cite>, University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor MI (2014). <a href="http://hdl.handle.net/2027/spo.12869322.0001.001" onclick="window.open('http://hdl.handle.net/2027/spo.12869322.0001.001'); return false" class="ref">http://hdl.handle.net/2027/spo.12869322.0001.001</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="krishnaveni2012">
                     <!-- close -->Krishnaveni and Sujatha 2012</span> Krishnaveni, R.,
                  and R. Sujatha. “Communities of Practice: An influencing
                  factor for effective knowledge transfer in organizations.” in <cite class="title italic">IUP Journal of Knowledge Management</cite> 10(1), (2012):
                  26-40.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="martinandrunyon2016">
                     <!-- close -->Martin and Runyon 2016</span> Martin, J. D. III,
                  and C. Runyon. “Digital humanities, digital hegemony:
                  Exploring funding practices and unequal access in the digital
                  humanities.” in <cite class="title italic">SIGCAS Comput. Soc.</cite>
                  [Online], 46(1) (2016):, 20-26. Available from: <a href="https://doi.org/10.1145/2908216.2908219" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.1145/2908216.2908219'); return false" class="ref">https://doi.org/10.1145/2908216.2908219</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="matres2018">
                     <!-- close -->Matres, Oiva and Tolonen 2018</span> Matres, I., M. Oiva
                  and M. Tolonen. “In Between Research Cultures — The State of
                  Digital Humanities in Finland”. <cite class="title italic">Informaatiotutkimus</cite> 37, no 2 (June 13, 2018). <a href="https://doi.org/10.23978/inf.71160" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.23978/inf.71160'); return false" class="ref">https://doi.org/10.23978/inf.71160</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="nygren2014">
                     <!-- close -->Nygren, Foka, and Buckland 2014</span> Nygren, T., A.
                  Foka, and P. Buckland. “The status quo of digital humanities
                  in Sweden: Past, present and future of digital history.”
                  <cite class="title italic">H-Soz-Kult. Kommunikation und Fachinformation für die
                     Geschichtswissenschaften</cite> [Online], October 23, (2014). Available
                  from: <a href="http://www.hsozkult.de/debate/id/diskussionen-2402" onclick="window.open('http://www.hsozkult.de/debate/id/diskussionen-2402'); return false" class="ref">http://www.hsozkult.de/debate/id/diskussionen-2402</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="oivaandpawlickadeger2020">
                     <!-- close -->Oiva and Pawlicka-Deger 2020</span> Oiva,
                  M. and U. Pawlicka-Deger. “Lab and Slack. Situated Research
                  Practices in Digital Humanities — Introduction to the DHQ Special
                  Issue.” in <cite class="title italic">Digital Humanities Quarterly</cite>
                  [this issue].
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="olson2014">
                     <!-- close -->Olson and Olson 2014</span> Olson, J. S., and G. M. Olson.
                  <cite class="title italic">Working Together Apart: Collaboration over the
                     Internet.</cite> Synthesis Digital Library of Engineering and Computer
                  Science. Morgan and Claypool, (2014).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="orlikowski2002">
                     <!-- close -->Orlikowski 2002</span> Orlikowski, W. J. “Knowing in Practice: Enacting a Collective Capability in
                  Distributed Organizing”. in <cite class="title italic">Organization
                     Science</cite> [Online], 13(3) June 1, (2002):, 249-273. Available from:
                  <a href="https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.13.3.249.2776" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.13.3.249.2776'); return false" class="ref">https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.13.3.249.2776</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="phillips2020">
                     <!-- close -->Phillips et al 2020</span> N. M. Phillips, A. Babbitt,
                  S. Cho, J. Kane, C. Mejeur, and C. Pearson “Creating spaces
                  for interdisciplinary research across literature, neuroscience, and DH. A
                  case study of the Digital Humanities and Literary Cognition Lab
                  (DHLC).”
                  <cite class="title italic">Digital Humanities Quarterly</cite> [this issue].
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="podesta2013">
                     <!-- close -->Podestá et al 2013</span> Podestá, G. P., C. E.
                  Natenzon, C. Hidalgo, and F. Ruiz Toranzo. “Interdisciplinary production of knowledge with participation of
                  stakeholders: A case study of a collaborative project on climate
                  variability, human decisions and agricultural ecosystems in the Argentine
                  Pampas.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Environmental Science and Policy, Rethinking Integrated
                     Assessments and Management Projects in the Americas</cite> [Online], 26
                  February 1, (2013): 40-48. Available from: <a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2012.07.008" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2012.07.008'); return false" class="ref">https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2012.07.008</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="reed2014">
                     <!-- close -->Reed 2014</span> Reed, A. “Managing an
                  established digital humanities project: Principles and practices from the
                  twentieth year of the William Blake Archive.” in <cite class="title italic">Digital Humanities Quarterly</cite> [Online], 8(1) (2014). Available from:
                  <a href="http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/8/1/000174/000174.html" onclick="window.open('http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/8/1/000174/000174.html'); return false" class="ref">http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/8/1/000174/000174.html</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="risam2015">
                     <!-- close -->Risam 2015</span> Risam, R. “Beyond
                  the Margins: Intersectionality and the Digital Humanities”. <cite class="title italic">English Faculty Publications: Salem State University</cite>,
                  (2015). <a href="http://digitalcommons.salemstate.edu/english_facpub/4" onclick="window.open('http://digitalcommons.salemstate.edu/english_facpub/4'); return false" class="ref">http://digitalcommons.salemstate.edu/english_facpub/4</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="romerolankao2013">
                     <!-- close -->Romero-Lankao et al 2013</span> Romero-Lankao, P.,
                  M. Borbor-Cordova, R. Abrutsky, G. Günther, E. Behrentz, and L. Dawidowsky.
                  “ADAPTE: A tale of diverse teams coming together to do
                  issue-driven interdisciplinary research.” in <cite class="title italic">Environmental Science and Policy, Rethinking Integrated Assessments and
                     Management Projects in the Americas</cite> [Online], 26 February 1, (2013):
                  29-39. Available from: <a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2011.12.003" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2011.12.003'); return false" class="ref">https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2011.12.003</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="siedlokandhibbert2014">
                     <!-- close -->Siedlok and Hibbert 2014</span> Siedlok, F.
                  and P. Hibbert. “The organization of interdisciplinary
                  research: Modes, drivers and barriers.”
                  <cite class="title italic">International Journal of Management Reviews</cite>
                  [Online], 16(2), (2014): 194-210. Available from: <a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/ijmr.12016" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.1111/ijmr.12016'); return false" class="ref">https://doi.org/10.1111/ijmr.12016</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="siemens2009">
                     <!-- close -->Siemens 2009</span> Siemens, L.. “‘It’s a Team If You Use “Reply All”’:
                  An exploration of research teams in digital humanities environments”.
                  <cite class="title italic">Literary and Linguistic Computing</cite> [Online],
                  24(2), (2009): 225-233. Available from: <a href="https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqp009" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqp009'); return false" class="ref">https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqp009</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="siemens2011">
                     <!-- close -->Siemens 2011</span> Siemens, L.. “The Balance between On-Line and In-Person Interactions: Methods for the
                  Development of Digital Humanities Collaboration.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Digital Studies/Le Champ Numérique</cite> 2, no. 1 (May
                  17, 2011). <a href="https://doi.org/10.16995/dscn.259" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.16995/dscn.259'); return false" class="ref">https://doi.org/10.16995/dscn.259</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="siemensetal2011">
                     <!-- close -->Siemens et al 2011</span> Siemens, L., R.
                  Cunningham, W. Duff and C. Warwick. “A Tale of Two Cities:
                  Implications of the Similarities and Differences in Collaborative Approaches
                  within the Digital Libraries and Digital Humanities Communities.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Literary and Linguistic Computing</cite> 26, no. 3
                  (September 1, 2011): 335–48. Available from: <a href="https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqr028" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqr028'); return false" class="ref">https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqr028</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="suominen2018">
                     <!-- close -->Suominen 2018</span> Suominen, J. “History of Digital Cultures”. Presentation at <cite class="title italic">the Digital History Method Roadshow</cite>, University of Turku, Finland,
                  February 5, (2018).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="svensson2010">
                     <!-- close -->Svensson 2010</span> Svensson, P. “The landscape of digital humanities.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Digital Humanities Quarterly</cite> [Online], 4(1) (2010).
                  Available from: <a href="http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/4/1/000080/000080.html" onclick="window.open('http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/4/1/000080/000080.html'); return false" class="ref">http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/4/1/000080/000080.html</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="tabak2017">
                     <!-- close -->Tabak 2017</span> [Tabak 2017] Tabak, E. “A hybrid model for managing DH Projects.” in <cite class="title italic">Digital Humanities Quarterly</cite> [Online], 11(1) (2017).
                  Available from: <a href="http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/11/1/000284/000284.html" onclick="window.open('http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/11/1/000284/000284.html'); return false" class="ref">http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/11/1/000284/000284.html</a>. 
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="taskinen2018">
                     <!-- close -->Taskinen, Kivimäki and Männistö 2018</span> Taskinen,
                  I., V. Kivimäki and A. Männistö. “Big data and history of
                  war experience”. Presentation at the Digital History Method Roadshow,
                  University of Tampere, Finland, February 7, (2018).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="terras2010a">
                     <!-- close -->Terras 2010a</span> Terras, Melissa. “Present, Not Voting: Digital Humanities in the Panopticon:
                  Closing Plenary Speech, Digital Humanities 2010.” in <cite class="title italic">Literary and Linguistic Computing</cite> 26, no. 3 (September
                  1, 2011): 257–69. <a href="https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqr016" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqr016'); return false" class="ref">https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqr016</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="terras2010b">
                     <!-- close -->Terras 2010b</span> Terras, M. “The
                  digital classicist: Disciplinary focus and interdisciplinary vision.”
                  In <cite class="title italic">Digital Research in the Study of Classical
                     Antiquity</cite>, edited by G. Bodard and S. Mahony. Ashgate, Farnham
                  (2010): pp. 171-189.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="terras2012">
                     <!-- close -->Terras 2012</span> Terras, M. “The
                  impact of social media on the dissemination of research: Results of an
                  Experiment.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Journal of Digital Humanities</cite> [Online], October 2,
                  (2012). Available from: <a href="http://journalofdigitalhumanities.org/1-3/the-impact-of-social-media-on-the-dissemination-of-research-by-melissa-terras/" onclick="window.open('http://journalofdigitalhumanities.org/1-3/the-impact-of-social-media-on-the-dissemination-of-research-by-melissa-terras/'); return false" class="ref">http://journalofdigitalhumanities.org/1-3/the-impact-of-social-media-on-the-dissemination-of-research-by-melissa-terras/</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="vangorpandbron2019">
                     <!-- close -->Van Gorp and Bron 2019</span> Van Gorp, Jasmijn,
                  and Marc Bron. “Building Bridges: Collaboration between
                  Computer Sciences and Media Studies in a Television Archive Project.”
                  in <cite class="title italic">Digital Humanities Quarterly</cite> 013, no. 3 (October
                  14, 2019). Available from: <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/13/3/000375/000375.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/13/3/000375/000375.html'); return false" class="ref">http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/13/3/000375/000375.html</a> .
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="whatisdigitalhumanities">
                     <!-- close -->What is digital humanities</span> What is
                  Digital Humanities web page [Online]. Available from: <a href="https://whatisdigitalhumanities.com/" onclick="window.open('https://whatisdigitalhumanities.com/'); return false" class="ref">https://whatisdigitalhumanities.com/</a> (last visited January 31,
                  2020).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="zorich2012">
                     <!-- close -->Zorich 2012</span> Zorich, D. M. “Transitioning to a digital world: Art history, its research centers, and
                  digital scholarship.” in <cite class="title italic">Journal of Digital
                     Humanities</cite> [Online], June 26, (2012). Available from: <a href="http://journalofdigitalhumanities.org/1-2/transitioning-to-a-digital-world-by-diane-zorich/" onclick="window.open('http://journalofdigitalhumanities.org/1-2/transitioning-to-a-digital-world-by-diane-zorich/'); return false" class="ref">http://journalofdigitalhumanities.org/1-2/transitioning-to-a-digital-world-by-diane-zorich/</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="ostling2018">
                     <!-- close -->Östling et al 2018</span> Östling, J., D. Larsson
                  Heidenblad, E. Sandmo, A. Nilsson Hammar, and K.H. Nordberg. “The History of Knowledge and Circulation of Knowledge. An
                  Introduction.” In <cite class="title italic">Circulation of Knowledge:
                     Explorations in the History of Knowledge</cite>, edited by J. Östling, E.
                  Sandmo, D. Larsson Heidenblad, A. Nilsson Hammar, and K. H. Nordberg, 9–33.
                  Lund: Nordic Academic Press, 2018.
               </div>
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar"><a href="#">Preview</a>  |  <span style="color: grey">XML</span> |  <a href="#" onclick="javascript:window.print();" title="Click for print friendly version">Print Article</a></div>
         </div>
      </div>
   </body>
</html>