<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <title>[PREVIEW] DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly: Multiple and Converging Literacies: A Review of Learning the
                    Virtual Life, edited by Peter Trifonas.</title>
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_screen.css"
            media="screen"
            type="text/css"
            rel="stylesheet"/>
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_print.css"
            media="print"
            type="text/css"
            rel="stylesheet"/>
      <style type="text/css">
        #mainContent {
          float: none;
          padding-top: 2em;
          padding-left: 4em;
          padding-right: 4em;
          margin-left: 225px;
           
        }</style>
      <script src="../../common/js/javascriptLibrary.js" type="text/javascript"/>
   </head>
   <body>
      <div id="mainContent">
         <div class="DHQarticle">
            <div id="pubInfo">Preview<br/>Volume 008 Number 3</div>
            <div class="toolbar">
               <form id="taporware" action="get">
                  <div>
                     <a href="/dhq/preview/index.html">Preview</a>
                     | 
                    <a rel="external" href="/dhq/vol/8/3/ 000191 .xml">XML</a>

| 
		   Discuss
			(<a href="/dhq/vol/8/3/ 000191 / 000191 .html#disqus_thread"
                        data-disqus-identifier=" 000191 ">
				Comments
			</a>)
                </div>
               </form>
            </div>
            <div class="DHQheader">
        
            
                
                <h1 class="articleTitle">Multiple and Converging Literacies: A Review of <cite class="title italic">Learning the Virtual Life</cite>, edited by Peter
                    Trifonas.</h1>
                <div class="author">
                  <span style="color: grey">Adam
                        Heidebrink-Bruno</span>
               </div>
            
            

            
        
        
        
        
               <span xmlns=""
                     class="Z3988"
                     title="url_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;rft_val_fmt=info%3Aofi%2Ffmt%3Akev%3Amtx%3Ajournal&amp;rfr_id=info%3Asid%2Fzotero.org%3A2&amp;rft.genre=article&amp;rft.atitle=Multiple%20and%20Converging%20Literacies%3A%20A%20Review%20of%20Learning%20the%20Virtual%20Life,%20edited%20by%20Peter%20Trifonas.&amp;rft.jtitle=Digital%20Humanities%20Quarterly&amp;rft.stitle=DHQ&amp;rft.issn=1938-4122&amp;rft.date=&amp;rft.volume=008&amp;rft.issue=3&amp;rft.aulast=Heidebrink-Bruno&amp;rft.aufirst=Adam&amp;rft.au=Adam%20Heidebrink-Bruno"> </span>
            </div>

            <div id="DHQtext">
        
               <div id="abstract">
                  <h2>Abstract</h2>
                  <p>A review of <cite class="title italic">Learning the Virtual Life: Public Pedagogy in a
                        Digital World</cite> (New York: Taylor &amp; Francis, 2012), edited by
                    Peter Trifonas. This review provides a detailed summary of the subjects explored
                    in Trifonas's collection of articles on digital pedagogy and their implications
                    on learning in an information society. Its aim is to provide researchers and
                    interested parties with a clear account of each chapter's argument in itself and
                    in relation to the other voices speaking on related subjects both within and
                    beyond the collection reviewed here. While this review's primary goal is to
                    remain objective, serving as a guide to busy scholars unfamiliar with Trifonas's
                    text, it also argues for the value of this collection while remaining critical
                    of its limitations as an anthology.</p>
               </div>
            
        
        
            
               <div class="counter">
                  <a href="#p1">1</a>
               </div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p1">Literacy is becoming an increasingly contested term. Our ability to navigate or even
                define literacy in the 21st century is subject to a variety of influences, both
                digital and analog. In defining what digital literacy is, one subscribes to a set of
                socio-political and, often, epistemological truths. <cite class="title italic">Learning
                    the Virtual Life: Public Pedagogy in a Digital World</cite> introduces its
                readers to a diverse collection of perspectives regarding literacy in the digital
                age. </div>
               <div class="counter">
                  <a href="#p2">2</a>
               </div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p2">As this text is comprised of a collection of essays, each chapter contends with the
                others for its message to permeate and strives to overcome the noise of the
                structure. While common themes emerge from the text as a whole, each chapter
                explores a unique perspective regarding virtual life. The digital culture is one of
                massive disorientation, with information delivered at frighteningly fast speeds.
                Trifonas recreates this atmosphere by sampling a diverse range of voices and
                philosophies from an international body of public pedagogues. To best provide the
                public with a feel for this text, I provide a survey of individual, chronological
                chapter summaries below and conclude with some general observations on the entire
                selection. As the reader will quickly realize, <cite class="title italic">Learning the
                    Virtual Life</cite> serves as a microcosm of the virtual life itself: dense
                with information and divergent perspectives, and thus resulting in a ubiquitous
                quality that’s a little hard to disentangle.</div>
               <div class="counter">
                  <a href="#p3">3</a>
               </div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p3">The first chapter of the book, written by Peta Mitchell, explores the tensions
                arising from a digital literacy emerging from a written, scriptural tradition of the
                academy. Due to this disparity, the author argues that "a
                    relative lack of critical self-awareness in [sic] research and teaching
                    practices" exists [<a class="ref" href="#trifonas2012">Trifonas 2012</a>, 2]. Mitchell
                situates his argument within the framework of Michel de Certeau’s "scriptural economy," where written discourse is the wealth
                produced by the institution [<a class="ref" href="#decerteau1984">de Certeau 1984</a>]. Reinforced over time,
                the scriptural economy "contributed to the prestige of print
                    publications," though many scholars appear to overlook how digital
                literacy may problematize this traditional notion of prestige [<a class="ref" href="#trifonas2012">Trifonas 2012</a>, 5]. While many scholars point out how emerging
                technologies, open access, and digital publication <em class="emph">could </em>displace the
                scriptural economy, none of these scholars "break the circuit of
                    the scriptural economy" themselves [<a class="ref" href="#trifonas2012">Trifonas 2012</a>, 7].
                However, Mitchell pushes beyond the scriptural/digital dichotomy to ask "what, then, might a critical approach to digital literacy
                        in the University look like?"
                     [<a class="ref" href="#trifonas2012">Trifonas 2012</a>, 9]. The new medium could inspire a critical reflection on the scriptural economy
                as a discursive formation rather than normative. Further, Mitchell observes, digital
                writing "disrupts the solitude and interiority of the essay . . .
                        and foregrounds communities of writing through communal writing"
                     [<a class="ref" href="#trifonas2012">Trifonas 2012</a>, 10]. While these evolving spatial politics are not essentially democratic or
                liberatory, they do hold the potential to expose and subvert traditional academic
                literacy; the key is to step back from the established economy and think
                critically.</div>
               <div class="counter">
                  <a href="#p4">4</a>
               </div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p4">In the second chapter, "New Epistemologies," the authors
                follow a Post-industrial strain of thought, expanding on Jean-François Lyotard’s
                suggestion that knowledge has lost its "use value" in
                return for "exchange value." Like the previous chapter,
                Jenson and Castell agree that these new media conditions could disrupt the authority
                of the written form, and they explore this idea regarding representations of
                knowledge and the self in various digital environments. Pulling from pop culture and
                contemporary news examples, such as Tila Tequila’s MySpace success and a personal
                account of the Virginia Tech shootings, the authors define a wholly post-modern
                conception of knowledge: knowing as "a kind of obsessive account
                    keeping," or digital curation [<a class="ref" href="#trifonas2012">Trifonas 2012</a>, 19]. The
                digitally represented "self," however, is one of constant flux,
                managed not only personally, but interpersonally, through online networks, throwing
                previous notions of public/private boundaries into disarray. In contrast, Second
                Life offers a digital environment where one has significantly more autonomy in
                creating identity, unbound from the socioeconomic realities of the analog world.
                Jenson and Castell then turn their focus to Wikipedia, and the "legitimation crisis" it brings forward, where "the epistemic basis of its claims to knowledge is seen as
                        unstable, unreliable . . . [and] radically 'open'"
                     [<a class="ref" href="#trifonas2012">Trifonas 2012</a>, 24]. The legitimation game played and reinforced by the academy is deeply
                affected by such an epistemological shift. Readers and non-experts are called to the
                domain of the producers and experts, which calls, as the authors suggest, "for a corresponding shift in post-literate pedagogy" that
                views production "as a necessary and enduring condition of
                        knowledge-transmission"
                     [<a class="ref" href="#trifonas2012">Trifonas 2012</a>, 25]. Wikipedia operates in a radically democratized space, which not only
                expects, but also requires crowd participation to survive. Thus, Wikipedia
                remediates epistemic foundations: knowledge, like one’s digital self, is in constant
                flux, suggesting a deeply constructivist perspective. Ultimately, the epistemology
                outlined here encourages a pedagogical shift from students as consumers to students
                as producers.</div>
               <div class="counter">
                  <a href="#p5">5</a>
               </div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p5">Next, Michael Hoechsmann reminds the often idealistic early-adaptor readers that "the majority of young people spend their online time
                        creating and sharing identity texts in highly constrained, commercial
                        environments"
                     [<a class="ref" href="#trifonas2012">Trifonas 2012</a>, 32]. In contrast to the first two essays, this chapter takes a decidedly less
                optimistic view of the digital landscape, suggesting that the primary online
                activity of today’s youth is entertainment-centered, involving "Consciousness, Communication, Community, and Consumption" — in short,
                behaviors that youth have been performing for a long time, regardless of technology
                    [<a class="ref" href="#trifonas2012">Trifonas 2012</a>, 32]. Using Richard Lanham’s text <cite class="title italic">Economics of Attention </cite>[<a class="ref" href="#lanham2006">Lanham 2006</a>],
                Hoechsmann takes a closer look at the cultural production of the youth population.
                He views the relationship between adults and youth as a "vicious
                    cycle," where the adults misinterpret youth intentions and youths sense
                indifference and inattention from the adults [<a class="ref" href="#trifonas2012">Trifonas 2012</a>, 33].
                Participatory digital spaces, such as Facebook, act as a stage where users must
                perform their identity in order to exist. These same spaces serve as communication
                platforms and communities where youth hang out, develop networks, and strengthen and
                coordinate offline relations. Yet the sites on which youth engage are not neutral
                environments; they are "virtually unregulated domains run by
                    private enterprise," led by commercial intentions [<a class="ref" href="#trifonas2012">Trifonas 2012</a>, 40]. The author concludes that "despite the rhetoric of change" surrounding new media
                practices, much remains the same. </div>
               <div class="counter">
                  <a href="#p6">6</a>
               </div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p6">Richard Kahn follows with the challenge of reconstructing the term
                    <em class="emph">technoliteracies</em>from a highly contested domain of competing
                definitions, aiming for an understanding that is "at once oppositional, radically democratic, and committed
                        to sustainability"
                     [<a class="ref" href="#trifonas2012">Trifonas 2012</a>, 45]. In accordance with John Dewey [<a class="ref" href="#dewey1916">Dewey 1916</a>], Kahn recognizes
                technology as inherently political and historical, though he doesn’t share Dewey’s
                techno-optimism, noting the various sorts of oppression that could arise from
                emerging technologies. For this discussion, Kahn turns to Ivan Illich (Illich 1973),
                who emphasizes that the tools of technology hold within them the rules and codes of
                the designer, as unequal as they might be. Next, Kahn focuses on defining literacy,
                not as "a singular set of abilities but [as] multiple"
                     [<a class="ref" href="#trifonas2012">Trifonas 2012</a>, 47], again reminding the reader that such a concept is closely tied to issues of
                power. The author then situates the increasing importance of technological literacy
                historically, particularly its emerging in the late 1960s and becoming a popular
                cultural issue by 1983 with the publication of <cite class="title italic">A Nation at
                    Risk</cite>
                [<a class="ref" href="#NCEE1983">NCEE 1983</a>]; technoliteracy could no longer be ignored. By the turn of
                the millennium, technoliteracy was seen as a crucial skill, though still largely a "site of struggle [and] a contested terrain used by the
                        left, right, and center of different nations to promote their own
                        interests"
                     [<a class="ref" href="#trifonas2012">Trifonas 2012</a>, 52]. Kahn goes on to say that "those interested in social and
                    ecological justice should look to define and institute their own oppositional
                    forms" of technoliteracy [<a class="ref" href="#trifonas2012">Trifonas 2012</a>, 52]. The
                political battleground is changing and educators and activities are needed to ensure
                that the interests of the oppressed are being discussed. A critical sense of all
                literacies, not just technoliteracy, must be developed. In a world where media
                culture serves as a "form of pedagogy," it is crucial
                that individuals are aware of the behaviors and roles being suggested by the media
                    [<a class="ref" href="#trifonas2012">Trifonas 2012</a>, 53]. Inoculation is not enough, Kahn argues.
                Rather, students must be able to "read, analyze, and decode
                    media texts" and further "interrogate the political economy, cultural bias, and
                        environmental effects of computer-related technologies"
                     [<a class="ref" href="#trifonas2012">Trifonas 2012</a>, 53–54]. Technoliteracy, as defined by this article, "must teach people to become more ethical producers,"
                     [<a class="ref" href="#trifonas2012">Trifonas 2012</a>, 56]. Such producers, then, can aid in redesigning technology towards human needs,
                rather than commercial ends. </div>
               <div class="counter">
                  <a href="#p7">7</a>
               </div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p7">Today’s information ecology comprises "a system of people, practices, values, and technology in a
                        certain environment"
                     [<a class="ref" href="#trifonas2012">Trifonas 2012</a>, 63]. This ecology, the authors of the "Learning Environment
                    and Digital Literacy" chapter argue, do not only replace similar analog
                practices, but rather "alter the basic foundations of our existing conceptions of
                        own cultural basis and value, attitudes and activities"
                     [<a class="ref" href="#trifonas2012">Trifonas 2012</a>, 63]. The authors call for a new curriculum, advocating for more learning
                experiences that promote digital competence. Like the previous chapter, these
                authors account for the fluid and contested nature of the term <em class="emph">digital
                    literacy</em>. The authors then observe that while the notion of the "digital divide" originally implied access issues, today, it
                is more likely a matter of "<em class="emph">quality of use</em>that
                    creates the gap," and continues to be a global problem [<a class="ref" href="#trifonas2012">Trifonas 2012</a>, 66]. Two Finnish digital literacy pedagogical
                practices are then defined as case studies. First, a project called <cite class="title italic">Towards Future Literacy Pedagogies </cite>(ToLP) explored
                pedagogies "that prepare young people for the literacy
                    challenges of a globalized, networked and culturally diverse world" with
                the ultimate goal of developing curriculum and teaching practices [<a class="ref" href="#trifonas2012">Trifonas 2012</a>, 69]. The second project, <cite class="title italic">Fostering ICT Usages in Pedagogical Practices </cite>(FICTUP), "aimed at transforming expert teachers’ pedagogical
                        practices with technology"
                     [<a class="ref" href="#trifonas2012">Trifonas 2012</a>, 71]. Through these detailed accounts of technology-based initiatives, the authors
                conclude that the focus should remain on pedagogical practices rather than
                technology. While technology can often be a useful educational tool, it must be
                implemented with due pedagogical consideration.</div>
               <div class="counter">
                  <a href="#p8">8</a>
               </div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p8">Stuart Poyntz’s chapter, "What Haunts the
                    Narcissus-Narcosis," proves to be one of the more challenging reads. The
                author shifts the reader’s focus from definitions of literacy to mediation, a
                process the author views as an active one that alters the meaning of the message
                being mediated, and applies a heavy dose of Derrida and McLuhan. Through Derrida,
                then, the author reminds the reader that critical agency doesn’t depend on
                authority, but rather "it is a function of the instability inherent in the
                        production of meaning itself"
                     [<a class="ref" href="#trifonas2012">Trifonas 2012</a>, 81]. This idea provides media educators new ways of introducing analysis to their
                students that are, at least in theory, independent of the educators' authoritative
                role. Within a McLuhan-inspired framework, the author traces "moments of crisis and opportunity" in media and offers them as possible
                locations for new media critique [<a class="ref" href="#trifonas2012">Trifonas 2012</a>, 94]. Ultimately,
                Poyntz invites these theorists’ perspectives into his essay to identify ways in
                which media educators can benefit from critical theory, specifically of those stated
                above. While it certainly continues to be a challenge to teach critical agency
                without favoring the perspective of the teacher, the author aims to provide "ways of putting levels of analysis in productive
                        tension"
                     [<a class="ref" href="#trifonas2012">Trifonas 2012</a>, 95]. </div>
               <div class="counter">
                  <a href="#p9">9</a>
               </div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p9">While the next chapter, "Wikilearning as Radical
                    Equality," is highly theoretical, it appears to be equally provocative
                and influential. In identifying the four antagonisms (which Slavoj Zizek argues
                Capitalism will not solve), authors Juha Suoranta and Tere Vadén define a radical
                new form of learning to combat the antagonism of intellectual property. The authors
                argue that learning "in the already existing world of free
                    resources, software and collaboration" brings the possibility to shift
                from an alienated education to a more just model [<a class="ref" href="#trifonas2012">Trifonas 2012</a>, 98]. "Wikilearning" imagines a self-organized
                group of learners assembling open access knowledge. The two authors have
                collaborated on pieces in the past on similar topics, and have co-authored a book on
                this very issue. In both this text and their work more widely, Suoranta and Vadén
                resist closed, top-down models of education and advocate for radical equality,
                beginning with a transformation of the student/teacher paradigm. Sites such as
                Wikipedia and Wikiversity offer a strong demonstration of "the power of collective learning in an ethical and very
                        straightforward way"
                     [<a class="ref" href="#trifonas2012">Trifonas 2012</a>, 104]. Highly knowledgeable of and informed by a pool of critical thinkers, such as
                Slavoj Zizek, Jacques Lacan, Jacques Rancière, Gilles Deleuze, and Félix Guattari,
                these authors set their argument into a critical and convincing framework. Together,
                Suoranta and Vadén provide the reader with an alternative model of education, one
                that is voluntary, rather than compulsory, inclusive, and self-directed. The goal of
                such an education isn’t "unreflective certainty," as the
                traditional model promotes, but rather "reflective
                    uncertainty," suggesting an epistemology of fluidity and transition. The
                implications of such a society are immense; as the authors not-so-humbly suggest, "the wikiworld is about changing the premises of living in
                        the world"
                     [<a class="ref" href="#trifonas2012">Trifonas 2012</a>, 112].</div>
               <div class="counter">
                  <a href="#p10">10</a>
               </div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p10">Beginning with a thorough survey of perspectives regarding the impacts of technology
                of youth culture, pedagogy, and education, John Potter acknowledges larger trends in
                youth technology engagement. Specifically, "Learner Voice and
                    Lived Culture" explores the pedagogical implications in response to two
                projects. The first project focuses on hearing the learner voice through audio and
                video production. Potter finds that "the desire to engage with the 'learner
                            voice' approach was representative of a wider need to see
                        experience of popular culture reflected and acknowledged within
                        pedagogy"
                     [<a class="ref" href="#trifonas2012">Trifonas 2012</a>, 117]. In reviewing the data from the first project, there appears to be a large
                disparity between how students are engaging with technology inside and outside of
                school, revealing a youth-led demand for more crossover between these two social
                environments. The second project, while still involving student-generated digital
                video production, shifts more towards authorship and identity. This project finds
                that "this new media literacy practice can be metaphorically
                        conceived as a form of 'curatorship' in the organisation
                        of digital media assets . . . which might be profitably and usefully
                        explored in pedagogical reforms"
                     [<a class="ref" href="#trifonas2012">Trifonas 2012</a>, 117]. Such mixing and remixing of the widely available symbols of cultural capital
                online allows student curatorship to render previously invisible processes visible,
                especially regarding student voice and identity. Both studies offer examples of
                Gee’s <em class="emph">affinity spaces</em>, as Potter observes these students behaving
                    "as new media practitioners," conflating a wide
                variety of skills and literacies to produce a media asset [<a class="ref" href="#trifonas2012">Trifonas 2012</a>, 122]. Potter leaves the reader with two future
                implications. First, pedagogy needs to implement technology provisions which "fit better with the needs, values and experiences of young
                        people"
                     [<a class="ref" href="#trifonas2012">Trifonas 2012</a>, 126–7]. Secondly, the author stresses the importance of finding "rich sources of data through self-representational work
                        with younger learners"
                     [<a class="ref" href="#trifonas2012">Trifonas 2012</a>, 127]. In all, Potter’s piece argues for increased media literacy practice and
                exposure across the curriculum. </div>
               <div class="counter">
                  <a href="#p11">11</a>
               </div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p11">In response to a line of research contending that open spaces such as Wikipedia are
                little more than amateurs spreading misinformation, John Willinsky argues quite to
                the contrary. In his case study, Willinsky examines Wikipedia as "a new site of knowledge, with a new level of public access
                        to research and scholarship"
                     [<a class="ref" href="#trifonas2012">Trifonas 2012</a>, 131]. By examining Wikipedia’s interaction and interconnectivity with other open
                sites of knowledge, such as in this case the <cite class="title italic">Stanford
                    Encyclopedia of Philosophy (SEP)</cite>, the author discovers that such sites
                can contribute greatly to one another. In many cases, individuals who were
                encountering philosophy concepts on Wikipedia followed links through to the SEP,
                finding more specialized knowledge. Many Wikipedia articles are informed by the
                content freely available on the SEP and often provide references to many different
                SEP topics in one article. Willinsky draws from the conversations of Wikipedia
                editors as they discuss changes and potential changes to articles within the
                discussion tab on a variety of Wikipedia articles. Examining these conversations
                allows the reader to get a feeling for the depth of analysis and understanding
                across the Wikipedia community. The "educational quality of
                    Wikipedia," Willinsky notes, comes largely from the "stance that its editors are taking on knowledge"
                     [<a class="ref" href="#trifonas2012">Trifonas 2012</a>, 141]. There is a great rhetorical argument and epistemic implication in the ready
                appearance of the three process tabs at the top of each Wikipedia article:
                    <em class="emph">editing, discussion, history</em>. These three elements are essential to
                learning, and as the title of this chapter suggests, Wikipedia, and open spaces like
                Wikipedia, provide a space for this new public literacy to emerge.</div>
               <div class="counter">
                  <a href="#p12">12</a>
               </div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p12">Returning to the idea of epistemology, the editor of this collection, Trifonas, and
                Robert Luke describe virtual living in terms of Lyotard’s <cite class="title italic">The
                    Postmodern Condition</cite>
                [<a class="ref" href="#lyotard1984">Lyotard 1984</a>]. Accordingly, knowledge, like the language in which
                it’s bound, is temporal. "Representation," the authors
                note, "deforms, denatures, and supplements the originary eidetic
                        structures of conceptual formations"
                     [<a class="ref" href="#trifonas2012">Trifonas 2012</a>, 148]. With the help of global technology, knowledge is not necessarily tied to the
                circulation of capital; rather, social actors can exchange information freely, or at
                least nearly so. The implications of this shift in information exchange, then,
                engender an alternate epistemology, one that builds a framework for new forms of
                education and educational spaces. The authors advocate here for a critical
                information literacy that not only incorporates the technical skills necessary to
                navigate digital spaces, but also understands and participates in the culture of the
                new environments. Furthermore, the authors emphasize access and accessibility as
                core components of critical information literacy, thus further advocating for the
                vast array of individuals who engage in the same digital spaces. Since the digital
                culture is one of participation, to overlook access issues would detract greatly
                from this central idea. The authors call for transparency in technology as it
                evolves and becomes embedded into existing cultural institutions, and thereby
                highlighting the underlying changes in methodology and its cultural implications.
                Finally, the authors arrive at "telepistemology," or the
                remote and virtual nature of today’s knowledge communities. It is here, in these
                poorly defined and rapidly changing virtual environments, that ideas are formed,
                shared, and shaped again, thus fostering a global learning network.</div>
               <div class="counter">
                  <a href="#p13">13</a>
               </div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p13">Chapter eleven provides a critical analysis of <cite class="title italic">Grand Theft Auto
                    IV </cite>and, more specifically, its expansion pack, <cite class="title italic">The
                    Ballad of Gay Tony</cite>. This video game offers a "series of homosocial bonding within the context of
                        otherwise traditional forms of masculinity"
                     [<a class="ref" href="#trifonas2012">Trifonas 2012</a>, 161]. While the main character frequently displays traditional hegemonic masculine
                traits, including violence and objectification of women, the game itself progresses
                a narrative plot based around defending an openly gay character, creating a rather
                complex dynamic. Such a game provides a safe place for individuals to explore and
                negotiate homosocial bonding. Amidst the milieu of homophobic and sexist commentary
                and suggestive humor coded into this game’s landscape, there appear to be spaces of
                covert intimacy that problematize the more explicit environmental prejudices. Many
                relationships, especially in contrast to earlier releases of GTA, are between men,
                and are often analogous to dating. The player is rewarded for behaving in ways that
                promote homosocial bonding. It is through the game’s humor that a balance is struck
                between overtly homophobic language and common homosocial behavior, as characters
                exchange ironic, and often crude, observations about each other’s hyper-masculine
                qualities. Such blatant mockery pushes these traits to the foreground, causing the
                players to reflect on the idea, and hopefully, assess their own language usage in a
                world also saturated by homophobic thoughts and behaviors. As modern technology is
                often cited as a tool that disembodies our identities, Marc Oullette renews
                frequently overlooked concerns of gender in this discussion of virtual life,
                providing a much-needed assessment of how digital environments can and do reflect
                our views on contemporary issues.</div>
               <div class="counter">
                  <a href="#p14">14</a>
               </div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p14">Themistoklis Aravossitas provides a familial account of coming to teach with
                technology in the subsequent chapter. After seeing the many positive encounters his
                children were having with technology in school, Aravossitas developed a blog concept
                to explore and demonstrate the identity and activities of his school [<a class="ref" href="#trifonas2012">Trifonas 2012</a>, 181]. Situating his experiences among the history
                of blogging and the evolution of Web 2.0 software, the author describes many uses of
                this technology, noting the transformative power this may have on our notion of
                literacy. Blogging offers both new ways to communicate as well as new ways to
                transmit those messages [<a class="ref" href="#trifonas2012">Trifonas 2012</a>, 185]. Thus, the idea of
                literacy is intricately linked to that of technology, which may help engender new
                opportunities and demands throughout the education system. Roles of teachers and
                students must be renegotiated in terms of the new communities that are made
                available through emergent technologies. Such expectations can only be met, the
                author argues, if educators take a transformative approach to pedagogy — if they are
                willing to construct appropriate curricular requirements, while emphasizing critical
                literacy. Unlike many of the other authors in this text, Aravossitas provides an
                explicit application of his ideas in terms of classroom use, including some
                preliminary results of this implementation. This feature may prove beneficial to the
                reader who is new to or nervous about technological endeavors in education. </div>
               <div class="counter">
                  <a href="#p15">15</a>
               </div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p15">The final chapter turns from writing in an online space to a more immersive
                experience: digital gaming. While Peter Trifonas does well to problematize and
                contextualize the debates on the virtual world, he ultimately states that "digital technologies have transformed cultural perceptions of
                    learning and what it means to be literate," rooting this cultural
                phenomenon deeply within the realm of technology [<a class="ref" href="#trifonas2012">Trifonas 2012</a>, 199]. With an air of skepticism, Trifonas questions the language commonly
                used to describe Web 2.0 behaviors such as <em class="emph">interactivity </em>and
                    <em class="emph">immersive</em>, each elusive and problematic in their own ways.
                Approaching the concept of digital games, then, the author proposes a variety of
                questions spanning from inquiries into historical comparisons to contemporary
                cultural appreciation. One major shift is a growing tendency to use games outside
                the entertainment field to immerse "players" into a
                highly realistic virtual site of army training, commerce, education, or industry,
                among others [<a class="ref" href="#trifonas2012">Trifonas 2012</a>, 202]. Virtual worlds can promote a
                wide variety of social exchanges and even "construct new types of shared cultural participation and
                        communality"
                     [<a class="ref" href="#trifonas2012">Trifonas 2012</a>, 204]. These new forms of cultural participation, when considered in light of
                pedagogical concerns, have great potential to transform the learning environments of
                the future.</div>
               <div class="counter">
                  <a href="#p16">16</a>
               </div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p16">These seventeen contributors offer a diverse mix of perspectives on digital learning
                topics. It remains difficult, even after reading the text, to say anything
                conclusive about this growing field. And perhaps that’s the point. That the
                education technology field is emerging quickly with hopeful implications is certain;
                as this text suggests, it is doing so most likely with more advocates than critics.
                Nevertheless, while many points of connection appear between the chapters, what
                really stands out is how highly contested the digital terrain remains. Trifonas has
                selected voices for this text that challenge one another, demanding of the reader
                the critical skills so thoroughly advocated for throughout the collection. To
                distill the ideas of these several authors into a single narrative would be contrary
                to its ideology and internal logic. Like the digital realm itself, <cite class="title italic">Learning the Virtual Life </cite>offers multiple answers,
                complete with contradictions and competing ideologies.</div>
               <div class="counter">
                  <a href="#p17">17</a>
               </div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p17">As you take the journey through the multiplicity of these pages, one reader may sense
                the underlying anarchist tendencies of Illich permeating through, where another
                reader gathers a sense of technological determinism, or in contrast, the sheer
                possibility of technology in the classroom. The experience of reading <cite class="title italic">Learning the Virtual Life</cite> will largely depend on the
                reader’s (de)construction of each chapter/perspective. Yet, this diversity in
                content is not met by the same diversity in form. Many of the chapters are packed
                with critical voices that may prove challenging to newcomers in the field, while
                offering little in terms of application. The task of utilizing these frameworks
                remains within the hands of the readers, to interpret and implement the ideas of
                these digitally-minded thinkers, however they see fit.</div>
        
        
            

        
            </div>
            <div id="worksCited">
               <h2>Works Cited</h2>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="dewey1916"><!-- close -->Dewey 1916</span> Dewey, John. <cite class="title italic">Democracy and Education: An Introduction to the Philosophy of
                        Education</cite>. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 1916. </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="illich1973"><!-- close -->Illich 1973</span> Illich, Ivan. <cite class="title italic">Tools for Conviviality</cite>. New York: Harper and Row, 1973. </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="lanham2006"><!-- close -->Lanham 2006</span> Lanham, Richard A. <cite class="title italic">The Economics of Attention: Style and Substance in the Age of
                        Information</cite>. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2006.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="lyotard1984"><!-- close -->Lyotard 1984</span> Lyotard, J-F. <cite class="title italic">The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge</cite>. Minneapolis:
                    University of Minnesota Press, 1984. </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="NCEE1983"><!-- close -->NCEE 1983</span> The National Commission on Excellence in
                    Education. <cite class="title italic">A Nation at Risk: The Imperative for Educational
                        Reform</cite>. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Education, April
                    1983.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="trifonas2012"><!-- close -->Trifonas 2012</span> Trifonas, Peter. <cite class="title italic">Learning the Virtual Life: Public Pedagogy in a Digital
                        World</cite>. New York: Taylor and Francis Group, 2012. </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="decerteau1984"><!-- close -->de Certeau 1984</span> de Certeau, Michel. <cite class="title italic">The Practice of Everyday Life</cite>. Trans. of <cite class="title italic">Arts de faire</cite> (Steven Rendall, Trans.). Berkeley:
                    University of California Press, 1984. </div>
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar">
               <a href="#">Preview</a>  |  <span style="color: grey">XML</span> |  <a href="#"
                  onclick="javascript:window.print();"
                  title="Click for print friendly version">Print Article</a>
            </div>
         </div>
      </div>
   </body>
</html>
