<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <title>[PREVIEW] DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly: </title>
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_screen.css"
            media="screen"
            type="text/css"
            rel="stylesheet"/>
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_print.css"
            media="print"
            type="text/css"
            rel="stylesheet"/>
      <style type="text/css">
        #mainContent {
          float: none;
          padding-top: 2em;
          padding-left: 4em;
          padding-right: 4em;
          margin-left: 225px;
           
        }</style>
      <script src="../../common/js/javascriptLibrary.js" type="text/javascript"/>
   </head>
   <body>
      <div id="mainContent">
         <div class="DHQarticle">
            <div id="pubInfo">Preview<br/>Volume  Number </div>
            <div class="toolbar">
               <form id="taporware" action="get">
                  <div>
                     <a href="/dhq/preview/index.html">Preview</a>
                     | 
                    <a rel="external" href="/dhq/vol/// 000183 .xml">XML</a>

| 
		   Discuss
			(<a href="/dhq/vol/// 000183 / 000183 .html#disqus_thread"
                        data-disqus-identifier=" 000183 ">
				Comments
			</a>)
                </div>
               </form>
            </div>
            <div class="DHQheader">
        
            
                
                <h1 class="articleTitle">Shakespeare His Contemporaries: collaborative curation and
                    exploration of Early Modern drama in a digital environment</h1>
                <div class="author">
                  <span style="color: grey">Martin Mueller</span> &lt;<a href="mailto:"
                     onclick="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate(''); return false;"
                     onkeypress="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate(''); return false;"/>&gt;, Northwestern University</div>
            
            

            
        
        
        
        
               <span xmlns=""
                     class="Z3988"
                     title="url_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;rft_val_fmt=info%3Aofi%2Ffmt%3Akev%3Amtx%3Ajournal&amp;rfr_id=info%3Asid%2Fzotero.org%3A2&amp;rft.genre=article&amp;rft.atitle=Shakespeare%20His%20Contemporaries%3A%20collaborative%20curation%20and%20exploration%20of%20Early%20Modern%20drama%20in%20a%20digital%20environment&amp;rft.jtitle=Digital%20Humanities%20Quarterly&amp;rft.stitle=DHQ&amp;rft.issn=1938-4122&amp;rft.date=&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.aulast=Mueller&amp;rft.aufirst=Martin&amp;rft.au=Martin%20Mueller"> </span>
            </div>

            <div id="DHQtext">
        
               <div id="abstract">
                  <h2>Abstract</h2>
                  <p>This is the text of the Hilda Hulme Memorial Lectiure I gave at the Institute for
                    English Studies at the University of London in July 2013.</p>
               </div>
            
        
        
               <div class="div div0">
                  <h1 class="head">Introduction</h1>
                  <a class="noteRef" href="#d3e157">[1]</a>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p1">1</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p1">Hilda Hulme was a philologist working in the border area between linguistics and
                    literature at a time when work in this field produced some of the finest work
                    around. Since then Linguistics and Literary Studies have parted company, with
                    gains and losses on both sides. The digital turn offers the promise of
                    productive rapprochements, and part of my talk will be about that promise. </div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p2">2</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p2">To judge from her book <cite class="title italic">Explorations in Shakespeare’s
                        Language</cite> Hilda Hulme was a gifted miniaturist, practicing, in her
                    own words a "disciplined imagination" that combined
                        "the sober ant-like industry of the professional
                        scholar" with "the grasshopper swiftness of the
                        crossword puzzle addict (as well as the relaxed alertness of the confidence
                        trickster)." She admired earlier generations of scholars who (in
                    Malone’s words) "carefully examined" the "meanest books" because they "might
                        happily throw light on some forgotten custom, or obsolete
                        phraseology." But she also took those critics to task for not looking
                    closely enough. Scholarly ant and grasshopper, she shuttled between text and
                    context, Shakespeare and the language of his time, claiming that for about two
                    hundred words she had discovered "new elements of
                        meaning," while for three dozen words she argued that "the original text has more meaning than the emendations
                        currently accepted."
                    "On the negative side," she asserted that "I can confidently make two claims: I have invented no new
                        linguistic terminology and have put forward no new Shakespearean
                        emendations."</div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p3">3</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p3">The <cite class="title italic">Explorations in Shakespeare’s Language</cite> is a work
                    of modesty and cunning, well reviewed at the time and well worth studying half a
                    century later. The "context" for Hulme’s microanalysis of
                    Shakespearean textual cruxes was the Oxford English dictionary, her wide reading
                    in local and regional records, both printed and in manuscript form, and
                    encyclopedic works like Thomas Cooper’s <cite class="title italic">Thesaurus</cite>,
                    the most ambitious Latin dictionary of the late 16th century. The evidence is
                    often very sparse, as Hulme reminds us at every turn. The sparser the evidence,
                    the more ingenious its parsing, with the strengths and weaknesses that come from
                    this situation.</div>
               </div>
               <div class="div div0">
                  <h1 class="head">The allographic journey of texts, the query potential of the digital surrogate
                    and scalable reading</h1>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p4">4</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p4">Let me turn from Hilda Hulme’s work to my topic "Shakespeare
                        His Contemporaries," which you note implies a similar shuttling
                    between text and context. I will talk about the ways in which digital resources,
                    tools, and methods have greatly increased the range, granularity, speed, and
                    accuracy of such shuttling. I will tell you about how I came to the
                        "digital turn," and I will use three mouthfuls of terms,
                    the "allographic journey of texts," the "query
                        potential of the digital surrogate," and "scalable
                        reading." I will also say a little about DATA, my acronym for
                    digitally assisted text analysis. "Assisted" is an essential ingredient in
                    my understanding of that term. </div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p5">5</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p5">Nelson Goodman, in his <cite class="title italic">Languages of Art</cite>, uses the
                    opposition of "autographic" and "allographic" works to distinguish between physical artifacts that
                    are uniquely embodied (autographic) and symbolic artifacts that can be embodied
                    in different notational systems (allographic). There are
                        "originals" of the Mona Lisa and of Michelangelo’s David,
                    but the autograph of Bach’s <cite class="title italic">Art of Fugue</cite> is not the
                        "original" of that work, although it is the
                        "original" of that manuscript considered as a physical
                    artifact.</div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p6">6</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p6">Texts are allographic objects par excellence. We like notations that we are used
                    to, and we like to think that there is a close relationship between a work and
                    its original system of notation. Early Modern scholars often are attached to
                        "original" spellings, just as some music lovers prefer
                    performances on "original" instruments. But what we hear in
                    such a performance is something very different from what Bach’s contemporaries
                    would have heard. They would have heard the ordinary sound of the strings and
                    winds of their day. We hear the difference from the ordinary instruments of our
                    day. The difference may be illuminating in various ways, but it is a delusion to
                    think that what we hear is closer to some putative original. Similarly, texts
                    are not defined by the ways in which they are spelled or by the paper on which
                    they are written.</div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p7">7</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p7">Consider the texts of ancient Greek. The familiar notation we encounter in the
                    pages of Teubner, Budé, or Oxford Classical has a lot to do with Porson’s
                    handwriting, but would have been unintelligible to Aeschylus or Plato. For
                    several decades, betacode was the most common form of writing and reading Greek
                    on a computer. Betacode used the symbols available on a standard English IBM
                    keyboard of the fifties to represent accented Greek through a combination of
                    Roman Capital letters, parentheses, forward, and back slashes – very ugly to
                    look at and detested by many classicists as barbarian technology. But to judge
                    from inscriptions on Greek vases from the sixth and fifth centuries, betacode
                    stripped of its accents and breathing markers is arguably closer to what Homer's
                    first readers would have seen. </div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p8">8</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p8">The <cite class="title italic">Iliad</cite> may or may not have existed in anything
                    like its current form before it was written down, but since then it has been on
                    an allographic journey with many steps. The young Plato would have read it in
                    the Old Attic alphabet, which is like Latin in not distinguishing between short
                    and long vowels. The <em class="term">metagrammatismos</em> of the fourth
                    century distinguished between long and short forms of "e" and "o."
                    Accents and breathing marks would have been unknown to Aristotle. Venetus A, the
                    most important of the <cite class="title italic">Iliad</cite> manuscripts stands on
                    our side of the transitions from scroll to codex, scriptura continua to space
                    between words, and the division of letters into upper and lower case.
                    Villoison’s 18th-century edition of Venetus A is on our side of the print
                    revolution. Not many years from now readers of the <cite class="title italic">Iliad</cite> in Greek are likely to encounter it first in a digital format
                    on some mobile device.</div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p9">9</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p9">Each of the steps in this allographic journey has its own
                        "affordances" and gives to a text a particular query
                    potential. The transition from scroll to codex is particularly interesting. A
                    codex is a random access device, greatly speeding up forms of non-contiguous
                    reading. It encourages the creation of metadata in the form of tables of
                    content, indexes, and the like. From a conceptual perspective, the promise of
                    such metadata is clearly envisaged in the Biblical concordance invented by
                    13th-century monks, but the realization of its full potential is the work of
                    16th-century publishers and scholars, to whom we owe the conversion of canonical
                    texts into aggregates of small citable chunks that serve as the
                        "hyperlinks" of a print-based structure of external
                    look-up tools. The chapter-and-versification of the Bible by Estienne is the
                    most radical example. The same publisher segmented Plato’s texts into chunks of
                    approximately 100 words each, identified by the “Stephanus numbers” that have
                    for four centuries served as the universal identifiers of Platonic passages.</div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p10">10</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p10">So much for the query potential of the printed text. What about the query
                    potential of the digital surrogate? We use the term "digital
                        surrogate" to describe a digital version of a text that originated
                    in the world of print or manuscripts. The digital surrogate differs from a
                        "born-digital" document. But is a digital <cite class="title italic">Iliad</cite> any more of a surrogate than Venetus A or
                    Villoison’s edition of it? Or does it simply represent another step in the
                    allographic journey of texts, a big step to be sure, but not a step that is
                    usefully described as a descent from the more to the less real?</div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p11">11</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p11">I have been a Homer scholar for much of my life, and my interest in digitally
                    assisted text analysis has its origin in my trying to get a better handle on the
                    problem of repetitive or formulaic language in the <cite class="title italic">Iliad</cite> and <cite class="title italic">Odyssey</cite>. My take on Homer
                    was deeply shaped by Karl Reinhardt’s essay of 1937 about the judgment of Paris.
                    While conceding that the poems are rooted in an oral tradition, I never believed
                    that they were themselves "oral" (whatever that means), and I
                    was always attracted to some form of the hypothesis that their distinctive
                    features were the result of a productive collision between two language
                    technologies, orality and writing. I also thought that repetitions came in quite
                    different forms and for a while tried to keep track of different kinds and their
                    occurrences on the 3x5 index cards of an earlier world. Then I discovered the
                    power of relational databases. If you were a business man and wanted to know
                    which of your customers owned properties in both Colorado and Connecticut, that
                    was the kind of question "Oracle" excelled at answering with great speed
                    and accuracy. The philological cousin of that question is very hard to answer in
                    a print-based environment. If you come across a repetition, you can look up its
                    other occurrences. 19th-century commentaries like Ameis-Hentze are very good at
                    keeping track of occurrences and letting you move from one to the other. But the
                    printed commentary offers little help in finding the locations of all repeated
                    strings that occur in <cite class="title italic">Iliad</cite> 1 and <cite class="title italic">Odyssey</cite> 8 but nowhere else. By contrast, the
                    relational oracle (whether Oracle, SQLServer, MySQL, SQlite) offers a lot of
                    fast and accurate help, if (and that is not a small "if") you give it the
                    data in a form it can handle. </div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p12">12</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p12">With the help of two programmers I built a list of all strings of two or more
                    words that occurred at least twice in Early Greek epic, all 36,000 of them with
                    their 192,000 occurrences. Each item in that list consisted of a string, its
                    length, and its citation. From these three data points, as well as counts and
                    summaries derived from them, I was able to construct a simple taxonomy of
                    repetitions, which I classified in terms of how they answered to the question
                        "Who is speaking?"</div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p13">13</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p13">There is a small but important body of "explicit" repetitions
                    in which a Homeric character orders another character to deliver a message to a
                    third person, and to do so verbatim. These passages are important because they
                    prove that the concept of deliberate and literal repetition was familiar to the
                    poets and their audience. At the other end of the spectrum are the many strings
                    of words without which it is hard to say anything in any language, things like
                        "I will not,"
                    "of the," and the like. You might say that the language is the
                        "speaker" of such phrases. Between these end points of
                    the spectrum there is a large body of phrases that are a genre specific version
                    of what the linguist John Sinclair called the "idiom
                        principle." Here we are in the world of "rosy-fingered dawn,"
                    "swift-footed Achilles" and the "wine-dark sea." They are the "formulae" that
                    Homeric epic is famous for. They are rarely longer than three words, although
                    there are some whole-line formulae, notably in lines that introduce or follow a
                    speech. Genre speaks in those phrases. </div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p14">14</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p14">Finally, there is a body of phrases that vary in length from two words to twenty
                    lines and occur twice or at most four times. There are about 14,000 of them with
                    a total of 34,000 occurrences. These are the cases for which a model of
                    predominantly oral production has no good explanation. When you have a problem
                    it is helpful to know how much of it there is and how it is distributed. For
                    instance, even without looking at the text of phrases shared between books, it
                    is noteworthy that there are a lot of phrases shared between the first and last
                    books of the <cite class="title italic">Iliad</cite> and a lot of phrases shared
                    between those books and the <cite class="title italic">Odyssey</cite>. </div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p15">15</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p15">The size of the corpus of Greek epic is only about a third of the Shakespeare
                    corpus. Many of what you might call "problem phrases" may
                    well be idioms that just happen not to occur a lot in what is quite a small
                    corpus. With other phrases — and especially longer phrases — it is more
                    plausible to argue that the poet speaks in the sense that the author of one
                    phrase unconsciously remembers a phrase from another context or deliberately
                    alludes to it. I have called such phrases "interdependent
                        repetitions." In the absence of external evidence it is typically
                    difficult to determine whether A copied B or B copied A. But the evidence for a
                    model copy relationship is often very strong, and if you accept the cumulative
                    evidence of such phrases, you must postulate the existence of a fairly stable
                    text, because without it you cannot have context-specific allusions. </div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p16">16</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p16">Such was my entrée into the world of DATA or digitally assisted text analysis.
                    Having access to the Homeric poems in the latest stage of their allographic
                    journey from the pre-literate or recently literate to the digital, I made use of
                    the query potential of the digital surrogate to re-examine aspects of the
                    Homeric Question, for the Homeric Question is fundamentally the question of how
                    to account for repetitions in the <cite class="title italic">Iliad</cite> and <cite class="title italic">Odyssey</cite>. This work was done in the nineties and I was
                    aware of the irony of applying the quite recent business technology of
                    relational databases to a set of literary phenomena that probably had something
                    to do with "Homer," whoever he or they were, applying the
                    recent business technology of writing, adapted from Phoenician traders, to the
                    genre of orally produced epic narrative and transforming it in the process. </div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p17">17</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p17">My work on Homer is available on a website called the Chicago Homer. For modern
                    readers with or without Greek, the digital text of that site with its associated
                    list of repetitions has some affordances that cannot be matched in print.
                    Whether the <cite class="title italic">Iliad</cite> was literate, oral, or a hybrid
                    of both, its reception for at least the first five hundred years of its life was
                    predominantly "aural." Greeks knew the <cite class="title italic">Iliad</cite> as Italians know <cite class="title italic">Rigoletto</cite>.
                    Repetitions, then, are something the expert listener hears. In the Chicago Homer
                    the novice reader of the <cite class="title italic">Iliad</cite> can
                        "see" repetitions because they are embedded as links that
                    can be displayed or hidden at the reader’s discretion. Repeated phrases can also
                    be filtered by length or count. Thus link technology can be used to help readers
                        "navigate the neural pathways of bardic memory"
                    as I once called it. </div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p18">18</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p18">Let me draw some general conclusions from my work with Homer before turning to
                    Shakespeare. My conclusions were encouraging in some ways but disappointing in
                    others. Disappointing because what the database told me about the distribution
                    and density of Homeric repetitions closely mirrored the observations of
                    generations of 19th-century scholars. Why bother with a tool that only tells you
                    what is already known? But you can be encouraged by that very fact. An IBM
                    manager once observed that computers are dumb but fast, while humans are smart
                    but slow. Considered as a database, the quarter million words of Greek epic are
                    very small fry. Quite a few 19th-century scholars knew all or much of Homer by
                    heart. So you can think of the collective memory of those scholars as a very
                    smart, if slow, computer that performed well when it worked on a problem within
                    its range and was given enough time. If an algorithmically produced and
                    organized inventory of repetitions "merely" replicates the
                    findings of that "human computer," you may turn things around
                    and say that this agreement confirms the utility of the machine and increases
                    your trust in its performance when it scales up to tasks that are clearly beyond
                    the scope of human memory.<a class="noteRef" href="#d3e445">[2]</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p19">19</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p19">Many people think that the main point of digitizing a text is to deliver readable
                    stuff to the screen of some digital device. More books for more readers is
                    certainly a noble goal. If you look at the world in 1983 and 2013 and compare
                    the amount of readable texts freely available then and freely available now to
                    anybody who is eager to read them and has access to the Internet, the progress
                    is remarkable. But beyond the question of extending there is the question of
                    enhancing access and exploring more fully the query potential of the digital
                    surrogate, which I should probably stop calling a surrogate. There is a lot more
                    that you can do with a digital text than read it, but what you can do with it
                    depends on what you do to it, and what you do to it is a matter of making the
                    text or a whole set of texts in a corpus "machine
                        actionable." To return to Hilda Hulme’s lovely phrase, a text that is
                        "machine actionable" in the right way can do a great deal
                    to make "the sober ant-like industry of the professional
                        scholar" more productive and its inevitable tedium more bearable. </div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p20">20</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p20">The fully machine actionable text is a data structure in which the text as a
                    sequence of words is supplemented by an inventory of its parts that are
                    classified in various ways. These supplementary data, often called metadata, can
                    be retrieved by those classifications and in a "just in time"
                    manner. In the Chicago Homer, a phrase in a particular place can lead you
                    instantly to all its other occurrences. The procedure is a very basic philologic
                    look-up: you go from a place in the text to a list that tells you more about the
                    phenomenon in that place, whether it is a word, a phrase, or a grammatical
                    condition. But in a well-designed machine actionable environment the time cost
                    of look-ups drops by orders of magnitude, and this drop changes the calculus of
                    what is quite literally "worthwhile."
                </div>
               </div>
               <div class="div div0">
                  <h1 class="head">Shakespeare His Contemporaries</h1>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p21">21</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p21">I have left Homer and for the past several years have focused on the question of
                    how to promote corpus-wide inquiries into Early Modern Drama by leveraging the
                    query potential of textual data in digital form. There are some 800 plays or
                    play-like texts printed before 1660 — the world of "Shakespeare His Contemporaries" generously construed. They amount to
                    at least 15 million words, 60 times the size of Homer, 20 times the size of
                    Homer, and well beyond the scope of individual memory. Bibliographical and other
                    records about them have been exhaustively studied by generations of scholars.
                    Most of the text themselves are available in the digital transcriptions of the
                    EEBO-TCP project. Students of Early Modern Drama live in a data-richer world
                    than students of Homer. They have access to the TCP transcriptions as well as to
                    digital facsimiles of the printed originals, which are rarely excellent,
                    sometimes very bad, but often good enough. The quality of the digital
                    transcriptions is largely a variable of the facsimile the transcribers had in
                    front of them.<a class="noteRef" href="#d3e481">[3]</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p22">22</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p22">Compared with a hundred or fifty years ago, there are a lot more literary
                    scholars today whose career depends on publishing something that will get them
                    promoted. The MLA bibliography for 2012 contains ~64,000 entries compared with
                    some 15,000 entries in 1962. We also live in an age that has been suspicious of
                    the highly canonical, celebrates the margin, and likes to decenter or open up
                    things. You would think, then, that both in absolute and relative terms,
                    non-Shakespearean plays would receive a lot more attention than they have in the
                    past. But this is not the case. Instead we have more scholars chasing the same
                    three dozen Shakespearean and at best two dozen non-Shakespearean plays.
                    Consider <cite class="title italic">Titus Andronicus</cite> and <cite class="title italic">Lust’s Dominion</cite>, both of them plays about a lascivious queen and an
                    ambitious Moor. There are 2915 references to Shakespeare’s play in JSTOR,
                    compared with 133 for <cite class="title italic">Lust's Dominion</cite>. And <cite class="title italic">Lust's Dominion</cite> does relatively well because it is
                    about a hot topic. If you compile the bibliography for a minor Elizabethan play,
                    you will often find that it is very short and that the more substantive
                    treatments are quite old. The highly canonical is alive and well or, to put it a
                    little more cynically, scholars like to attach themselves to celebrities,
                    celebrities are "positional goods," and you can't have more
                    than a few dozen at a time.  You can see why professional scholars stay away
                    from minor plays, unless they explicitly deal with hot topics. A play may
                    interest them, but how will an entry about it look on a c.v.? </div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p23">23</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p23">But what if you made the object of inquiry not this or that play, but the corpus
                    as a whole and you presented the corpus in such a way that it fully leverages
                    the query potential of a digital corpus? It is a corpus of ~15 million words. It
                    includes just about all dramatic texts that have survived, and from what we know
                    about lost plays, it is a substantial portion of what was ever printed. And what
                    if you set out to recruit a new group of young explorers, who either need not
                    worry about their c.v. or whose c.v. would be improved by respectable work on
                    minor Early modern plays? How about undergraduates? Almost forty years ago I
                    served on a search committee for a position in the Italian department while at
                    the same serving as second reader for an honors thesis written by a very gifted
                    undergraduate in that department, who went on to law school. Her written work
                    towered above that of the job candidates, and ever since then I have believed
                    that bright and ambitious undergraduates can make substantial scholarly
                    contributions.</div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p24">24</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p24">How do you leverage the query potential of a digital corpus of plays? Some years
                    ago I was part of the MONK Project, which took some steps towards creating a
                        "digital environment designed to help humanities
                        scholars discover and analyze patterns in the texts they study." MONK
                    was an acronym for "metadata offer new knowledge." Metadata are data about
                    data. If you know about library catalogs or email headers you know about
                    metadata. </div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p25">25</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p25">The diabolical side of metadata has been much in the news lately. Here is a
                    quotation from the <cite class="title italic">New York Times</cite> (June 9):</div>
                  <blockquote>
                     <p class="ptext">American laws and American policy view the content of
                    communications as the most private and the most valuable, but that is backwards
                    today, said Marc Rotenberg, the executive director of the Electronic Privacy
                    Information Center &lt;<a class="ref"
                           href="http://epic.org/"
                           onclick="window.open('http://epic.org/'); return false">http://epic.org/</a>&gt;, a Washington group. The information associated with
                    communications today is often more significant than the communications itself,
                    and the people who do the data mining know that.</p>
                  </blockquote>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p26">26</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p26">The metadata mind turns from the content of an individual text to a network of
                    often very abstract relationships between properties of many texts, and these
                    properties may not be limited to what is traditionally considered to be
                        "in" the text. </div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p27">27</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p27">Drama is a particularly productive target for some metadata-oriented inquiries,
                    because a quite explicit and rigid system of metadata is part of the genre
                    itself. Plays are divided into speeches, scenes, and acts. They have stage
                    directions and speaker labels. The metadata status of these things is nicely
                    highlighted by the use of Latin: <span class="foreign i">Actus primus, dramatis
                        personae, exeunt omnes, moritur</span>. The dramatis personae or cast
                    list often include descriptions like "Gonzalo, a humorous
                        old lord," which is an informal classification by sex, age, social
                    status, and temperament. A well-structured cast list (not all of them are) is a
                    little prosopography. Can you construct from individual cast lists a machine
                    actionable prosopography of the genre? The power of such a thing would go
                    considerably beyond Thomas Berger's very helpful <cite class="title italic">Index of
                        Characters in Early Modern English Drama, Printed Plays, 1500-1660</cite>.
                    You would have something like a census of ~10,000 dramatic characters who speak
                    more than a sentence or two and their interactions over a period of 150
                        years.<a class="noteRef" href="#d3e551">[4]</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p28">28</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p28">You learn a lot about a large corpus if each of its analyzable items is
                    consistently described in terms of very few and quite simple data points. The
                    power of business and political intelligence derives from the patient pursuit of
                    connecting a few dots across millions or billions of items. I do not want to
                    claim that in applying such techniques to a corpus of plays we will "pluck out the heart of their mystery." For that I am
                    too much of a student of Karl Reinhardt and his wonderful philological credo of
                    1946, which I now like to read as a prophetic warning about the opportunities
                    and limits of the digital turn: <blockquote>
                        <p>Philology becomes more
                        questionable, the less it can let go of itself. This does not mean that it
                        loses its confidence within its own domain. Nor does it mean that it
                        excludes itself from the expansion of its borders that developments in the
                        humanities have opened to it.  But it is part of philological awareness that
                        one deals with phenomena that transcend it. How can one even try to approach
                        the heart of a poem with philological interpretation? And yet, philological
                        interpretation can protect you from errors of the heart. This is not a
                        matter of the <em class="term">ars nesciendi</em> that Gottfried
                        Hermann insisted on in his day. There it was a matter of things you could
                        not know because of accidents, the circumstances of transmissions, or of
                        inadequate acuity. Here it is a matter of something that is necessarily
                        beyond reach but our awareness of it effects our way of reaching towards it.
                        It is not a matter of the ultimate <em class="emph">Ignoramus</em> but of a
                        methodological modesty that is aware of something that must be left unsaid
                        and that with all perceptiveness or intuition you cannot and should not
                        trespass on.</p>
                     </blockquote>
                  </div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p29">29</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p29">But Reinhardt's methodological modesty should not keep us from learning the many
                    things that can be learned from what Michael Oakeshott in another context has
                    called mapping operations. Because its metadata are so explicit and consistent
                    across many texts, drama is a genre that lends itself to digital mapping and
                    offers quite precise directions about how to do it. </div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p30">30</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p30">The TCP texts of Early Modern drama are encoded in TEI-XML. Every speech by a
                    character is captured in a container or "element" that has a speaker label.
                    If each speaker label maps consistently to the appropriate character in the cast
                    list you can create an abstract model of the text in which for a while you
                    ignore what is said but focus instead on who speaks at what length in the
                    presence of what other characters. You see the play as a network of
                    communicative acts among named individuals. If your cast lists contain
                    classifications of characters by sex, age, and social status, a play becomes a
                    network of communications among characters of a certain kind. If you have data
                    of this kind for all or most Early Modern plays, you can use those abstract
                    models as the basis for analysis by genre, period, or author. A lot of labour is
                    buried in this succession of "ifs," but the pay-off can be considerable.
                    Over the course of the coming year I hope to turn at least some of these
                        "ifs" into readily available data. </div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p31">31</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p31">Franco Moretti has called such procedures "distant
                        reading," a term that poses a polemical challenge to the
                    time-hallowed practice of "close reading." I prefer
                    the term "scalable reading." Digital tools and
                    methods certainly let you zoom out, but they also let you zoom in, and their
                    most distinctive power resides precisely in the ease with which you can change
                    your perspective from a bird's eye view to close-up analysis. Often it is a
                    detail seen from afar that motivates a closer look.<a class="noteRef" href="#d3e606">[5]</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p32">32</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p32">"Scalable reading" of this kind is at the heart of new forms
                    of intertextual analysis opened up by digital tools that let you discover shared
                    verbal patterns across large data sets. These tools are critical to genomic
                    research and to what you might call forms of forensic philology where you focus
                    on plagiarism detection or authorship attribution. But their true power for
                    Literary Studies lies in their potential for enhancing our understanding of the
                    shared verbal patterns that make up a genre or tradition. In this regard Homer's
                    formulae are only a very special and marked case of a universal rule: to
                    understand a genre is to understand its ways of repeating and varying. </div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p33">33</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p33">In an earlier experiment I extracted a database of repeated phrases (trigrams or
                    longer) from 320 Early Modern plays, using the same criteria as in the
                    construction of the database of Homeric repetition. My findings are quite
                    provisional, but I am encouraged to apply this procedure to a larger corpus of
                    600 plays or more as soon as they have been cleaned up sufficiently to remove
                    unwanted "noise" from the data. With 320 plays you have 51,040 pairwise
                    combinations of works. You count and measure the repeated n-grams shared between
                    any such combination, give each of them a weighted value and define the degree
                    of sharing as the sum of that value. With 600 plays you have almost 200,000
                    pairwise combinations, but the numbers are manageable: they are inputs for
                    statistical summaries, and the larger numbers give you more confidence about the
                    status of outliers that reward closer analysis. </div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p34">34</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p34">My admittedly crude procedure arranges some 50,000 "shared rep
                        values" on a continuum that ranges from hardly anything to quite a
                    lot. My confidence in the procedure is strengthened by the fact that it
                    accurately measures things you would expect. The overall degree of repetivity in
                    Early Modern drama is much less than in Homer, but the distribution is quite
                    similar if you accept a play as an equivalent of a Homeric book. The median
                        "shared rep value" for repetitions within a play exceeds
                    the median value between plays by a factor of 20, from which unsurprising fact
                    you draw the useful conclusion that phrasal repetition between plays is actually
                    quite rare.<a class="noteRef" href="#d3e635">[6]</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p35">35</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p35">It is not surprising that plays by the same author share on average twice as many
                    n-grams as plays by different authors. It is of some interest to note that the
                    factor of authorship (~2) is much larger than the factors of genre or closeness
                    in time (~1.2). Measurements of this kind hardly pluck the heart of mystery out
                    of the genre, but they map out the territory in useful ways and give you a sense
                    of threshold values. If you come across a pair of plays considered to be by
                    different authors and you observe that their shared rep value lies two standard
                    deviations above the average for same-author plays it is worth asking whether
                    something is going on here. If one of these phrases strikes you as particularly
                        "salient" the argument from salience is not answered by
                    the objection that one swallow does not make a summer. </div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p36">36</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p36">I see a bright future for Literary Studies in a world where well-curated corpora
                    become objects of inquiry for scholars who have no qualms about putting simple
                    but effective statistical routines in the service of the traditional virtues of
                    philological tact and acumen. Last week I began a two-month project in which
                    five undergraduates and I will work on collaborative curation of the EMD corpus
                    and lay the groundwork both for a frequency-based lexicon of words and phrases
                    that will support close intertextual analysis. I will apply to the 15 million
                    words of Early Modern Drama the same techniques I applied to the 250,000 words
                    of Early Greek epic. If things go well the resulting database will be in place
                    by the end of this year. And I hope to take some steps towards a census of <em class="term">dramatis personae</em> by age, sex, and social status.</div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p37">37</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p37">This database will let the reader of a particular play, whether novice or expert,
                    navigate its allusive pathways in the web of intertextual parallels, and get
                    some initial measure of its closeness or distance from other plays. The 19th and
                    early 20th century scholars who created much of the documentary infrastructure
                    for the study of Early Modern texts had a deeply nuanced understanding of their
                    materials, acquired over decades of continuing contact with them. Today's young
                    scholars do not have this, and it would be foolish to promise that my database
                    will give them similar mastery in days or weeks. But it will cut down the time
                    cost of acquiring an initial sense of the lay of the land. And if they catch on
                    to the spirit of corpus-wide inquiry and keep in mind Karl Reinhardt's warning
                    about the need for methodological modesty, they may sometimes see details and
                    patterns that Chambers, Greg, or Bentley could not see. The giants of those days
                    relied on the Oxford English Dictionary and the texts they could touch with
                    their hands. Today's readers, whether amateurs or professionals, cannot only
                    look at the entire corpus of Early Modern Drama, but for any philological
                    question arising from those texts they can also go to the corpus of EEBO texts
                    before 1700, which now includes 45,000 titles and will grow to about 70,000 by
                    2015. Simple queries to that corpus can be answered in seconds.</div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p38">38</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p38">If the texts of Early Modern Drama are made available to bright undergraduates in
                    machine actionable forms that fully leverage the query potential of such texts
                    for corpus-wide inquiry, and if several generations of such bright
                    undergraduates do honours theses or other independent study projects that are
                    based on corpus-wide inquiry, I am confident that they will find many
                    interesting things to say about the language, forms, and themes as well as the
                    historical and social contexts of Early Modern Drama. But their digital tools
                    and resources will make no difference to the fact that their work will require
                    the "disciplined imagination" that combines "the sober ant-like industry of the professional
                        scholar" with "the grasshopper swiftness of the
                        crossword puzzle addict." You can say of their work what Greg Crane
                    said in his recent manifesto about the Open Philology Project: "This is not a digital philology or digital humanities project.
                        [It] is about philology."</div>
               </div>
               <div class="div div0">
                  <h1 class="head">Postscript</h1>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p39">39</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p39">The five Northwestern undergraduates referred to above – with one exception
                    freshmen or sophomores at the time – were Nayoon Ahn, Hannah Bredar, Madeline
                    Burg, Nicole Sheriko, and Melina Yeh. Over the course of eight weeks in the
                    summer of 2013 they demonstrated remarkable persistence and ingenuity in working
                    their way through 493 non-Shakespearean plays written between 1576 and 1642. The
                    Text Creation Partnership (TCP) source texts contained 38,880 incompletely
                    transcribed words, of which they corrected 32,300, using AnnoLex, aWeb-based
                    collaborative curation tool designed by Craig Berry. The remaining 6,500 known
                    errors include many difficult passages, but they add up to relatively
                        "light work" for the "many hands" that
                    can and should have a go at them, anywhere and anytime from <a class="ref"
                        href="http://annolex.at.northwestern.edu"
                        onclick="window.open('http://annolex.at.northwestern.edu'); return false">http://annolex.at.northwestern.edu</a>.</div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p40">40</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p40">Since giving this talk, I have made progress with two other aspects of turning
                    the texts into a machine-actionable corpus. Using Berger's <cite class="title italic">Index of Early Modern English Drama</cite> I have mapped over 90% of some
                    300,000 speaker labels to unique corpus-wide ID's that can serve as the values
                    for the "who attributes" of <span class="monospace">&lt;sp&gt;</span>
                    elements in the TEI encoding of the source texts. Phil Burns' MorphAdorner was
                    an essential tool for that task, and it was equally important for mapping the
                    original spellings of the texts to standardized forms. This mapping creates a
                    virtual corpus in which the plays of Shakespeare and his contemporaries wear the
                    same orthographical uniform. Orthographical or typographical
                        "accidentals" provide crucial evidence for some
                    inquiries, but for other inquiries they stand in the way and make different
                    texts look more different than they are, especially for novices. The flexibility
                    of the digital surrogate lets you filter out or focus on evidence, depending on
                    your purpose. </div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p41">41</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p41">Curation and exploration are two sides of the coin of working with textual data
                    in digital form. Right now, Shakespeare His Contemporaries is mainly a data
                    project in a predominantly curatorial phase. With a little luck by the time the
                    quatrocentenary of Shakespeare's death rolls around in 2016, a user-friendly
                    version of it will up and running in an open access environment that will cut
                    down on the tedium of some older forms of exploration and enable new forms of
                    exploration that previously were impracticable. </div>
               </div>
        
         
            </div>
            <div id="notes">
               <h2>Notes</h2>
               <div class="endnote" id="d3e157">
                  <span class="noteRef">[1]</span>The following is the text of the Hilda Hulme Memorial Lecture, which I gave on
                    July 2, 2013 at the University of London's Institute of English Studies.</div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d3e445">
                  <span class="noteRef">[2]</span>Within the domain of Homeric scholarship, there
                        is a narrower point. Proving that the other guy is almost certainly wrong is
                        an important aspect of scholarly progress. And the machine-generated data
                        made it very clear that the more radical claims about the traditional and
                        formulaic quality of Homeric verse rest on a wilful neglect of critical
                        evidence. </div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d3e481">
                  <span class="noteRef">[3]</span>It is well within the parameters of current technology to
                        design an environment for collaborative and user-driven curation of these
                        texts so that readers of this or that text can suggest corrections as they
                        go along – a digital version of the printer’s plea in the errata section of
                        Harding’s <cite class="title italic">Sicily and Naples</cite>: <blockquote>
                     <p>Reader. Before thou proceed'ſt farther, mend with thy pen
                            theſe few eſcapes of the preſſe: The delight &amp; pleaſure I dare
                            promiſe thee to finde in the whole, will largely make amends for thy
                            paines in correcting ſome two or three ſyllables.</p>
                  </blockquote>This has been a
                        topic dear to my heart, but I will not say any more about it here except to
                        repeat it is entirely possible to build environments with appropriate
                        editorial supervision that allow for user-driven and incremental improvement
                        of texts over time. Educated and interested readers with no special
                        scholarly training will be able to spot and correct many errors in any
                        environment that allows for easy alignment of the page image with the
                        transcribed text. </div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d3e551">
                  <span class="noteRef">[4]</span>Imagine for a moment a crowdsourcing project in which readers
                        were encouraged to write "tweets" of 140 characters each
                        about characters and typical scenes or conflicts. You might end up with a
                        useful "folksonomy" of "dramemes" and
                        their distribution over time. With some skilful editing, these tweets could
                        become a data structure in which some aspects of each play are catalogued in
                        a reasonably consistent fashion. </div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d3e606">
                  <span class="noteRef">[5]</span>Shakespeare used the
                        word "fate" 62 times in 27 plays. This seems to be a thoroughly
                        unremarkable distribution of a word that is neither common nor rare. But if
                        you look at the distribution of the word in the context of 320 plays
                        (including Shakespeare's) you discover that "fate" is comparatively
                        speaking the most underused noun in Shakespeare. A very simple statistical
                        test shows that with regard to "fate," a term central to the rhetoric
                        of tragedy, Shakespeare is a negative outlier. The statistical oddity
                        prompts a closer look. But it will take a very close look to figure out
                        whether anything of interest is going on there.</div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d3e635">
                  <span class="noteRef">[6]</span>Just as in Homer, repetition rapidly declines with distance.
                        Compared with a model of random distribution, a very high percentage of
                        n-grams are separated by just a few hundred words.</div>
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar">
               <a href="#">Preview</a>  |  <span style="color: grey">XML</span> |  <a href="#"
                  onclick="javascript:window.print();"
                  title="Click for print friendly version">Print Article</a>
            </div>
         </div>
      </div>
   </body>
</html>
