<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
      <title>[PREVIEW] DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly: </title>
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_screen.css" media="screen" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_print.css" media="print" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" /><style type="text/css">
        #mainContent {
          float: none;
          padding-top: 2em;
          padding-left: 4em;
          padding-right: 4em;
          margin-left: 225px;
           
        }</style></head>
   <body>
      <div id="mainContent">
         <div xmlns:dhqBiblio="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/ns/biblio" class="DHQarticle">
            <div id="pubInfo">Preview<br />Volume 010 Number 3
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar">
               <form id="taporware" action="get">
                  <div><a href="//preview/index.html">Preview</a>
                      | 
                     <a rel="external" href="//vol/10/3/000257%0A                    %0A                .xml">XML</a>
                     
                     | 
                     		   Discuss
                     			(<a href="/dhq/vol/10/3/000257%0A                    %0A                /000257%0A                    %0A                .html#disqus_thread" data-disqus-identifier="000257&#xA;                    &#xA;                ">
                        				Comments
                        			</a>)
                     
                  </div>
               </form>
            </div>
            
            <div class="DHQheader">
               
               
               
               
               <h1 class="articleTitle">Covers and <em class="emph">Corpus</em> wanted!
                  Some Digital Humanities Fragments 
               </h1>
               
               <div class="author"><span style="color: grey">Claire
                     Clivaz</span> &lt;<a href="mailto:claire_dot_clivaz_at_sib_dot_swiss" onclick="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('claire_dot_clivaz_at_sib_dot_swiss'); return false;" onkeypress="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('claire_dot_clivaz_at_sib_dot_swiss'); return false;">claire_dot_clivaz_at_sib_dot_swiss</a>&gt;, Swiss Institute of
                  Bioinformatics
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               <span class="Z3988" title="url_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;rft_val_fmt=info%3Aofi%2Ffmt%3Akev%3Amtx%3Ajournal&amp;rfr_id=info%3Asid%2Fzotero.org%3A2&amp;rft.genre=article&amp;rft.atitle=Covers%20and%20Corpus%20wanted!%20Some%20Digital%20Humanities%20Fragments&amp;rft.jtitle=Digital%20Humanities%20Quarterly&amp;rft.stitle=DHQ&amp;rft.issn=1938-4122&amp;rft.date=2016-08-03&amp;rft.volume=010&amp;rft.issue=3&amp;rft.aulast=Clivaz&amp;rft.aufirst=Claire&amp;rft.au=Claire%20Clivaz"> </span></div>
            
            
            <div id="DHQtext">
               
               
               <div id="abstract">
                  <h2>Abstract</h2>
                  
                  
                  <p>Covers and bindings are collapsing in the digital textual
                     world. To begin with, the following paper argues that this
                     is not a genuinely new situation, since all cultural Western
                     history attests to written texts as never having been
                     autonomous from oral discourses and versioning steps.
                     Thenceforth – after analyzing the relationship between paper
                     and body, relying notably on Derrida – this article will
                     claim that we have the right and indeed, an obligation, to
                     "capture" new covers and bindings. During the 17th
                     century, in the lawless parts of the ocean, buccaneers
                     realized that the right to depart was the condition for the
                     capacity to be bound. Therefore, let us dare to depart from
                     ancient bindings and create new boundaries.
                  </p>
                  
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head"> 1. "I have appended separate annotations..."</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p1">1</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p1">By commenting on his annotated edition of the Greek New
                     Testament project from the <cite class="title italic">Vulgate</cite>, Erasmus claims in 1515 [<a class="ref" href="#erasmus1910">Erasmus 1910</a>, 113]: 
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>
                           I have translated the whole New Testament after
                           comparison with the Greek copies, and have added the
                           Greek on the facing pages, so that anyone may easily
                           compare it. I have appended separate annotations in
                           which, partly by argument and partly by the authority of
                           the early Fathers, I show that my emendations are not
                           haphazard alterations, for fear that my changes might
                           not carry conviction and in the hope of preserving the
                           corrected text from further damage (<cite class="title italic">Epist. 337</cite>, ll. 862–868; [<a class="ref" href="#krans2006">Krans 2006</a>, 14].
                        </p>
                     </blockquote>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p2">2</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p2">As the exegete Jan Krans explains, the last sentence shows
                     that Erasmus considers a text as remaining vulnerable and
                     corruptible if it is not accompanied by a commentary [<a class="ref" href="#krans2006">Krans 2006</a>, 14]. Erasmus adopts the same
                     attitude in other passages: the text has to be accompanied
                     by comments in order to be read correctly or according to
                     the intended sense. In other words, decades after the
                     invention of printing, Erasmus is still conditioned by the
                     practices of manuscript culture. His opinion reminds one of
                     the famous Platonian passage in the <cite class="title italic">Phaedrus</cite> regarding the written discourse that
                     "drifts all over the place [...and
                     is] unable to defend or help itself"; Plato
                     posits that speech is superior to written text, since the
                     former is: "written with intelligence in
                     the mind of the learner" (Plato, <cite class="title italic">Phaedrus</cite> 275e and 276a, [<a class="ref" href="#yunis2003">Yunis 2003</a>, 208]). A long time before the
                     "factishes" of the sociologist Bruno Latour [<a class="ref" href="#latour2010">Latour 2010</a>], written discourse acts here as
                     an intermediate being that is unable to know when it has to
                     speak or to stay quiet and which is dominated by oral
                     discourse. This present article thus aims to consider
                     written texts in the aforementioned manner and by
                     specifically analyzing the transformations of the
                     <em class="emph">corpus</em> and "cover" notions; then
                     inquiring about what happens to them in the digital turn.
                     Are covers and the <em class="emph">corpus</em> desegregating in the
                     process of "<em class="emph">dépapérisation</em>", the idea of
                     "de-paperization" according to the words of Jacques
                     Derrida? The French philosopher gave an illuminating
                     interview in 1997 (French version): "Paper or me, you know…"
                      [<a class="ref" href="#derrida2005">Derrida 2005</a>]. Derrida compares “de-paperization” to the
                     progressive shrinking of the <cite class="title italic">Wild Ass’s
                        Skin</cite> by Balzac
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p3">3</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p3">This article aims to delve into this process of
                     "de-paperization," and argues that the digital
                     world does not represent only a loss of corporeality but
                     eminently introduces new tensions, encounters with the body,
                     and ways of collaboration. Part 2 serves firstly as a
                     reminder that oral discourse and visual cultures have been
                     superseded by written discourse for only a relatively short
                     period of time within the Western framework. From Codex
                     <cite class="title italic">Zacynthius</cite> commentaries
                     (6<span class="hi superscript">th</span> century) to the five
                     manuscripts of the Swiss novel by Charles-Ferdinand Ramuz
                     <span class="hi italic">If the Sun Were Never to Return</span>
                     (1937 1<span class="hi superscript">st</span> edition), and the
                     diverse <span class="hi italic">Hamlet</span> versions, I wish to
                     recapture Western memory in its never-ending practice of
                     perpetual annotating, rewriting and versioning. The
                     inception of written material, its versioning as well as its
                     relationship to visual and oral materials, leads to the
                     enlightenment of its interaction with the topic of the
                     body-<em class="emph">corpus</em>. Part 3 focuses on the
                     relationship between corporeality and the digital material
                     of writing, pointing to a new relationship between the body
                     and the digital world. Finally, Part 4 will raise the
                     question of closures and limits; leading to the examination
                     of notions of anxiety as well as liberation.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p4">4</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p4">The subtitle of this article includes "Some Digital Humanities fragments," the last
                     word being a translation from the French
                     <em class="emph">"éclats"</em>, which can refer to fragments
                     of wrath, light, brilliance or something broken. This
                     subtitle points to the fact that Humanities is now present
                     as fragments within digital culture. This process of
                     Humanities’ fragmentation should draw Humanist scholars’
                     attention urgently to what the literary scholar Yves Citton
                     designates as the Humanities’ core duty: interpretation.
                     Considering Humanities as a social fact according to
                     Latourian inspiration, Citton expresses his own task thus:
                     
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>I would like to suggest that our
                           "knowledge societies" are worthy to be analyzed
                           first of all as <em class="emph">interpretation cultures</em> –
                           and that to put at the forefront questions of
                           interpretation has to lead us to deeply reconsider our
                           vision of social interactions, as well as our knowledge
                           mapping, the structuration of our academic institutions
                           and the expression of our politics claimings [<a class="ref" href="#citton2010">Citton 2010</a>, l. 142–146].
                        </p>
                     </blockquote>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p5">5</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p5">A similar approach was also presented by the great DH
                     scholar, Stefan Gradman at the DH 2013 conference in
                     Lincoln, Nebraska. Commenting on the EU project DM2E,
                     Gradman described the center of the Humanities field –
                     including <em class="emph">corpora</em>, metadata, social contexts,
                     references and dissemination/publication – as an
                     "interpretative modelisation"
                     <a class="noteRef" href="#d4e324">[1]</a>. Since
                     interpretation is at stake, one should return to the
                     beginning as Plato suggests in <cite class="title italic">Timaeus</cite> 48b: let us reconsider the written
                     discourse that "drifts all over the
                     place [...and is] unable to defend or help
                     itself" (Plato, <span class="hi italic">Phaedrus</span>
                     275e), and thus put the interpretative process at stake
                     whilst looking for the fragments of digitized
                     Humanities.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">2. "This discourse which is written with intelligence in
                     the mind of the learner": Telling and Listening as
                     Parts of our Writings.
                  </h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p6">6</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p6">In 2012, Clivaz et al. underlined that the
                     mass-scholarization of the 19<span class="hi superscript">th</span>
                     century led to the supremacy of printed literacy over other
                     forms [<a class="ref" href="#furet-ouzouf1977">Furet-Ouzouf 1977</a>, 349–369]. This
                     supremacy was however, rather short: between 1850 and 1980.
                     This period is accompanied by the notable decline of the
                     rhetorics in Germany and France, when rhetorical teaching at
                     high schools and universities stopped, specifically in 1897
                     in France [<a class="ref" href="#belhoste1977">Belhoste 1977</a>]. In Germany, the
                     work of Lucian of Samosata – a famous representative of
                     Greek rhetoric historical writing [<a class="ref" href="#samosate2010">Samosata 2010</a>] – was withdrawn from high
                     school teaching in 1857 [<a class="ref" href="#baumbach2002">Baumbach 2002</a>].
                     Instead, Leopold von Ranke, the father of German historicism
                     in contrast to Lucian, provided the basis of "annoying and <em class="emph">farblos</em>"
                     historical writing [<a class="ref" href="#ranke2000">Ranke 2000</a>, 4]. He
                     contrasted historical communication with rhetoric and the
                     use of pathos. In a 1964-1965 seminar titled <cite class="title italic">L’Ancienne rhétorique</cite>, Roland
                     Barthes emblematically presented rhetoric as already limited
                     to memory and to the archives [<a class="ref" href="#barthes1970">Barthes 1970</a>].
                     From that moment on, oral culture seems to have been almost
                     totally forgotten in European historical and literary
                     studies. This was to the profit of written texts that were
                     considered potential containers for all that which is
                     semiotic and thereby able to differentiate reality from the
                     fictional.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p7">7</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p7">Since the 1950s in the USA, oral cultures have recaptured
                     scholars’ interest, notably in certain historical and
                     sociological research areas. During this period, a
                     preoccupation with oral history appeared alongside two other
                     developments: research focused on the elites and
                     institutions (Columbia School); and on marginal populations
                     (Chicago School). These developments aided the emergence of
                     alternative and hidden histories as well as their
                     transmission by orality (Descamps, 2005). This return to
                     orality is also present in the study of the notion of
                     literacy, notably in the work of Walter Ong [<a class="ref" href="#ong2002">Ong 2002</a>]. These approaches have contributed
                     to the development of a growing attention to plural
                     literacies in the Human and Social Sciences. Yves Citton
                     evokes these plural literacies in a <cite class="title italic">Le
                        Monde</cite> article in the following manner: 
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>In a literature classroom, the point is to
                           share the audacious gesture of interpretation, in the
                           presence of the historical collective that makes us
                           interpreters. It is related to the theatric or
                           choreographic performance, or to the sportive
                           performance, but also to the mystical initiation. [...]
                           The interpretative gesture can be ‘performed’ only in
                           the present [<a class="ref" href="#citton2013">Citton 2013</a>].
                        </p>
                     </blockquote>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p8">8</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p8">A look back in history shows that the "performed work"
                     seems obvious in Antiquity, a cultural framework where
                     orality is dominant, as the following musical example
                     demonstrates. The rhetor Dio Chrysostomus (2<span class="hi superscript">nd</span> century CE) speaks about
                     "Homeric music" (<span class="hi italic">musike</span>),
                     whereas his modern editor translates this as "Homeric
                     poetry"
                     [<a class="ref" href="#crosby1946">Crosby 1946</a>, 362–363]. Crosby, in the
                     first part of the 20<span class="hi superscript">th</span> century,
                     is unable to conceive that the Homeric work was
                     predominantly "music" to ancient ears. Ancient culture
                     and texts are full of musical indications that underline its
                     importance, as shown in an <em class="emph">a contrario</em> way by
                     Socrates’s ironic remark on public singers (the
                     "rhaposdes") and the actors who seem the be the
                     authentic wise men (Plato, <cite class="title italic">Ion</cite>
                     532d). In fact, the recurrent Platonic attacks on poetry,
                     and arts in general, underline their importance; Plato
                     himself uses assonance games, and <em class="emph">rythmus</em> with
                     long <em class="emph">sillabi</em> (Plato, <cite class="title italic">Laws</cite> 764de). Such a phenomenon can be observed
                     even in the in Rev 18,22a or Rev 14,2, where Paolo Garuti
                     considers the etymological word games as an attempt to
                     reproduce something of the cithara sounds. He concludes that
                     such phenomena belong to the cultural encyclopedia of that
                     time: music was present in words and minds [<a class="ref" href="#garuti2013">Garuti 2013</a>, 64].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p9">9</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p9">It is more surprising – at least for scholars working on
                     Antiquity, who often present an amnesia regarding the 16<span class="hi superscript">th</span> and 17<span class="hi superscript">th</span> centuries – to consider the impact of oral
                     performance on the manuscripts of the Shakespearian <cite class="title italic">Hamlet</cite>. Such amnesia has a
                     powerful impact on the way in which one considers authorship
                     in our present digital culture. If the "old audience"
                     of Humanist scholars was trained to focus on relatively
                     narrow historical periods, the new audience of Humanist PhD
                     students, whatever they choose as topic, should be trained
                     to obtain a deep knowledge of the history of authorship and
                     of the writing material, from the roll to the screen. If one
                     needs to be further convinced thereof, the Shakespearian
                     case of <cite class="title italic">Hamlet</cite>’s composition
                     history is surely a good argument. Paul Eggert has recently
                     presented a synthesis of the situation of the first three
                     editions of the printed play dating from 1603, 1604-1605 and
                     1623. The first version is probably an adaptation of a play
                     performed on the 26<span class="hi superscript">th</span> July 1602,
                     reconstructed from memory by the actors of the play and
                     written to be sold to an editor, Nicholas Ling [<a class="ref" href="#eggert2013">Eggert 2013</a>, 110]. The longer versions,
                     however, notably the second, could be literary versions
                     destined to be read rather than to be performed [<a class="ref" href="#eggert2013">Eggert 2013</a>, 111]. In other words,
                     Shakespeare had a genuine concern for his literary
                     reputation and took care of it, a fact that has been claimed
                     by many scholars since the 1980s. One is able to verify here
                     the influence of spoken discourse on printed literature.
                     Whereas the theatric performance influenced the most ancient
                     version of the text, the aggregate formed by public
                     discourse regarding the author has affected the longer
                     versions. Shakespeare was apparently influenced by the
                     diffuse presence of the public discourse on him. Borrowing
                     from the terminology of the literary critic Jérôme Meizoz,
                     one may say that this influence represented the trace of the
                     "literary postures" in the middle of the 17<span class="hi superscript">th</span> century [<a class="ref" href="#meizoz2007">Meizoz 2007 and 2011</a>]. Such a notion is confirmed in
                     the following statement by the Shakespearian scholar Lukas
                     Erne: "the first people who had a vested
                     interest in the rise of dramatic authorship were not the
                     playwrights themselves but the London printers,
                     publishers, and booksellers eager to render respectable
                     and commercially profitable what was initially an
                     enterprise with little or no prestige"
                     [<a class="ref" href="#erne2013">Erne 2013</a>, l. 1765–1767]. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p10">10</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p10">The impact of others’ discourses – readers, commentators,
                     newspapers and people in the street – on a printed text can
                     be consistently traced: they influenced Erasmus and his
                     annotations, as well as Shakespeare and his diverse
                     rewritings. Even before printing, manuscript culture offered
                     numerous traces of this impact. Let’s consider the Codex
                     <cite class="title italic">Zacynthius</cite> (6<span class="hi superscript">th</span> century, palimpsest), where
                     the Gospel according to Luke appears in the middle of pages
                     whose margins are full of patristic commentaries. Certain
                     folios even present two different versions of the Gospel
                     text, one in the center of the page and the other inside the
                     commentaries. However, in 1861, the modern editor Tregelles
                     was chosen to edit only the central version of the text
                     while ignoring the alternative versions present in the
                     commentaries [<a class="ref" href="#parker2009">Parker 2009</a>, 113–119]. Such
                     an editorial attitude, whose impact was valorized from Plato
                     to Erasmus, leads to loose information and to the neglect of
                     the commentaries – these <em class="emph">annotations</em>. Yet such
                     was the printed literacy at its height that it believed it
                     had the right to prune the "architext," to return to
                     Genette terminology: it believed it had the right to select,
                     choose, and cut beneath the cover and the front-page, the
                     "<em class="emph">page de garde</em>". The French phrase
                     "<em class="emph">page de garde</em>" designates the
                     front-page of a book that has the task of being a
                     "guard": if we are to discard the protection
                     offered by a book’s "cover" and the "guarding"
                     duty of the front-page, are we losing something in digital
                     writing? One can answer that the capacity to consider
                     textuality beyond the boundaries of the cover and front-page
                     was already present in Genette when he was describing the
                     poetic object as "the architext," as a network of
                     excellence: "the architext is, then, everywhere
                     – above, beneath, around the text, which spins its
                     web only by hooking it here and there onto that
                     network of architexture"
                      [<a class="ref" href="#genette1992">Genette 1992</a>, 83].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p11">11</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p11">If one considers the manuscripts and printed texts of
                     Charles-Ferdinand Ramuz from the 20<span class="hi superscript">th</span> century, one may estimate that annotation and
                     rewriting practices never stopped completely. In the 27<span class="hi superscript">th</span> and most recent volume of the
                     complete works of Ramuz, a computing tool allows the reader
                     to compare the five versions of <cite class="title italic">If the
                        Sun Were Never to Return</cite>, dating from 1937 to
                     1942 [<a class="ref" href="#sernier2013">Sernier 2013</a>]. The readers now have to
                     explain whether they have read a version of <cite class="title italic">If the Sun Were Never to Return</cite>
                     from 1937, 1939, 1940, 1941, or 1942. Such a perspective
                     unbinds the work from the book to make several versions or
                     steps. The fluctuating text plays with the "guard" of
                     the front-page. The cinematographic version by Claude
                     Goretta (1987) occupies its own space as yet another version
                     in a universe of plural literacies: it is the 1987 version
                     of <cite class="title italic">If the Sun Were Never to
                        Return</cite><a class="noteRef" href="#d4e549">[2]</a>. With respect to
                     the form, one is able to verify here what Wido van Peursen
                     refers to as constitutive of the digital culture: the
                     "text" is perceived as a document [<a class="ref" href="#vanpeursen2010">Van Peursen 2010</a>]. In the middle of digitalized
                     documents, unbound from their statuses as unique works,
                     emerges the question of content communication; "to communicate a thought," as an
                     interviewer asked Derrida in 1997 during a seminal interview
                     about the function of paper: "To what extent has [the paper] been
                     adequate for you to communicate your
                     thinking?"
                      [<a class="ref" href="#derrida2005">Derrida 2005</a>, 41].
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">3. Losing the body-corpus? </h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p12">12</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p12">Before answering this question about the adequacy of paper to
                     relate one’s thoughts, Jacques Derrida propounds an
                     impressive perspective on the "paper-body": 
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>Ever since I started writing, both the
                           institution and the stability of paper have been
                           constantly exposed to seismic shake-ups. The beasts of
                           relentless writing that we are could not remain either
                           deaf or insensitive to this. Every sign on the paper had
                           to be picked up as an advance sign: it foretold the
                           "loss" of a support: the end of the
                           "subjectile" is nigh. That is also, doubtless,
                           where this body of paper has a bodily hold on us [<a class="ref" href="#derrida2005">Derrida 2005</a>, 42].
                        </p>
                     </blockquote>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p13">13</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p13">Holding on to this "paper-body" perspective, this
                     current section of the article will underline how Derrida
                     frames this notion of fragmented textuality as a bodily
                     disconnection within our digital age. Relying on the
                     shrinking of <cite class="title italic">The Wild Ass’s
                        Skin</cite>, he discusses the inexorable shrinking of
                     this "hyletic" material, recalling that the Greek
                     <em class="emph">"ule"</em> also means "hood,
                     forest" and "material"
                     [<a class="ref" href="#derrida2005">Derrida 2005</a>, 46]. How could the
                     biblical scholars – to whom I belong – not be sensitive to
                     what happens here, knowing that the word "Bible" itself
                     supports notions of writing: papyrus is accorded the name
                     "<em class="emph">bublos</em>,", which refers to a plant
                     named in the Lebanese region of the ancient city of Bublos.
                     If one considers "<em class="emph">liber</em>" or "
                     <em class="emph">caudex</em>," these Latin words also refer to
                     the vegetal domain, specifically to the "hood" as
                     represented by both parts of a book’s cover which maintain
                     the folios inside. As Derrida summarizes it: "Paper is utilized in an experience
                     involving the body, beginning with hands, eyes, voice,
                     ears; so it mobilizes both time and space [<a class="ref" href="#derrida2005">Derrida 2005</a>, 36]". The same
                     "shrinking" process could affect "a certain
                     writing," warns Derrida: 
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>Can we
                           speak then of abandon, arrest, or inhibition when
                           designating the ongoing withdrawal or decline of a
                           certain kind of writing: particularly the decline of
                           steely writing with the point of a pen on the surface of
                           paper, the decline of the hand, or at any rate of a
                           specific and unique way of using the hand? If we were to
                           associate this withdrawal with an effectual untying,
                           namely the untying that effectively undoes the symbolic
                           link of writing to walking. Thereby moving along,
                           breaking a path, and untying the plotted connections
                           between eyes, hands, and feet, then perhaps we would be
                           dealing with the symptoms of another historical-, or as
                           some would perhaps say, a posthistorical-phase. At any
                           rate, another epoch could be hanging in the balance:
                           keeping us in suspense, carrying off another scene,
                           another scenario, keeping us distanced from, and raised
                           above paper; all this according to another model of the
                           prohibited. Therein lies a form of anxiety within the
                           agenda [<a class="ref" href="#derrida2005">Derrida 2005</a>, 54].
                        </p>
                     </blockquote>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p14">14</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p14">Seventeen years later, this anxiety is what is really at
                     stake in public opinion. The USA has stopped teaching
                     cursive writing to children [<a class="ref" href="#doll2012">Doll, 2012</a>],
                     whereas French newspapers misunderstood this news and
                     transmitted it as "the end of
                     handwriting at school" [<a class="ref" href="#luteaud2013">Luteaud 2013</a>]<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e667">[3]</a>. Taking Derrida into
                     consideration as he imagined the shrinking of only "a
                     certain writing," but not without also conceiving
                     this moment as "the earthquake that is
                     happening sometimes leads to 'losing one’s head' or
                     loss of 'sense'"
                     [<a class="ref" href="#derrida2005">Derrida 2005</a>, 58]. Perhaps it is worth
                     recalling that western cultural memory does not stop to say
                     it in a myriad of ways: body and books were jointly liable.
                     With this in mind, one should examine the figure of Melany
                     the Young, Christian literate in the fourth century CE. The
                     life of Saint Melany, beyond the hagiographical tone,
                     represents an interesting testimony on various aspects:
                     individual consciousness, the form of books, the reading
                     practices and the spiritual cross around the object of the
                     "book"
                     [<a class="ref" href="#gorce1962">Gorce 1962</a>]. Married at the age of fourteen
                     (§1), Melany risked death during the birth of her second
                     child (§5), and at twenty years old, reached an agreement
                     with her husband so that she could live in chastity (§6).
                     The pretext was an imperative need to devote herself to God
                     but evidently Melany focused on an intellectual and ascetic
                     life; reading everything she found and copying the Old and
                     New Testaments several times per year (§26). She also wrote
                     small booklets called <cite class="title italic">somatioi</cite>,
                     "little bodies" (§23 and 36). There is a clear
                     symbolic exchange: whereas Melany’s body stopped making
                     children, she translated her fecundity to these "little
                     bodies" that she wrote. This relationship between
                     body and manuscript can be seen throughout the entire
                     history of the codex, as animal skin parchments
                     exemplify.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e708">[4]</a></div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p15">15</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p15">One needs to consider the size of the loss, of the shrinking
                     of this "paper-body." After a moment of nostalgic
                     reflection, one can then look closely at the next wave
                     growing on the horizon: the new bindings, dependencies,
                     hybrids and paradoxical relationships between the body and
                     the digital material of writing. To consider the Digital
                     Humanities for what they are or could be, one has to let
                     them walk at their own rhythms. Humanities is "done"
                     with fingers, according the Latin word <em class="emph">digitus</em>.
                     Thus, one may refer to the hand-machine interface that one
                     sees with the finger-print scanning on the iPhone 5S <a class="noteRef" href="#d4e722">[5]</a> or by discovering
                     words "with the top of the
                     fingers" as a Swiss newspaper titled the DH
                     project EPFL-Venice [<a class="ref" href="#fabre2013">Fabre 2013</a>, 36].
                     With symbolic and semantic sensitivity, Robert Darnton
                     related the German word <em class="emph">Fingerspitzengefühl</em> –
                     to be able to discover the world in details with the top of
                     the fingers – to the emergence of digital screens: 
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>We find our way through the world by means
                           of a sensory disposition that the Germans call
                           <em class="emph">Fingerspitzengefühl</em>. If you were
                           trained to guide a pen with your finger index, look at
                           the way young people use their thumbs on mobile phones,
                           and you will see how technology penetrates a new
                           generation, body and soul [<a class="ref" href="#darton2009">Darton 2009</a>, XII].
                        </p>
                     </blockquote>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p16">16</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p16">Even breath can lead us to a surprising body-machine dialogue
                     as we noticed in a new form of multi-media publication, the
                     eTalk, that we are developing as an interdisciplinary team
                     in Lausanne: the software, Audacity, shares the discourse of
                     a scholar in small pieces by following the rhythmus of their
                     breath. "Sentences" in the eTalk are replaced by
                     another measure: breaths that share the discourse in small
                     pieces of 2-3 sentences each [<a class="ref" href="#clivaz2015a">Clivaz et al., 2015a</a>].
                     In other words, the digital world does not represent only a
                     loss of corporeality but, as previously stated, eminently
                     introduces new ways of collaboration, tensions, and
                     encounters with the body, with amazing new medical and IT
                     findings such as the creation of an artificial skin.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e756">[6]</a> If the body is at
                     stake in a digital culture [<a class="ref" href="#clivaz2015b">Clivaz 2015b</a>], the
                     questions of closure and delimitation – notions so important
                     in order to avoid a complete dissemination leading to
                     madness – remain necessary and have to be reconfigured. It
                     is thus an area of focus that requires examination.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">4. Towards closure and delimitation: the "capture" as
                     challenge.
                  </h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p17">17</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p17"> How will we react to the anxiety provoked by the loss of the
                     relationship between body and paper or by the so-called end
                     of "handwriting teaching"? Temporally speaking, our
                     first reaction when faced with an "out of the book"
                     textuality collapsing into an infinite "architexture"
                     would have been to develop a new form of scribal elitist
                     culture with the most sophisticated methods of electronic
                     encoding. Is this compatible with real DH dissemination? One
                     would hope to see more efforts made in this direction of
                     dissemination. Let us compare Wikipedia in its English and
                     French versions: Wikipedia.fr allows anyone to write and
                     upload an article without requiring basic HTML5 encoding
                     thanks to a "visual editor," whereas Wikipedia.org
                     requires HTML5 knowledge to modify a page or to create an
                     article.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e788">[7]</a> With the
                     introduction of a visual editor, it has been almost
                     effortless to write an article on French Wikipedia. This is
                     not a mere detail: it provides a way for allowing wider DH
                     dissemination, resulting in the means to enroll a wide
                     audience in the "wiki" process. The University of
                     Geneva (CH) has started to organize open workshops to
                     encourage and train women to contribute to the French
                     Wikipedia’s articles: the possibility to circumvent HTML5
                     encoding allows contributors to reach diverse audiences and
                     to raise the level of DH dissemination.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e801">[8]</a> Time will tell how the
                     situation evolves; as yet Wikipedia.org is still
                     untransformed.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p18">18</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p18"> The emergence of a new scribal culture will not be a
                     guarantee to us rediscovering the possibility of closures
                     and delimitations. To recapture the notion of a limit, one
                     should imagine the process in three steps. First, we have to
                     keep in mind that manuscripts and printed cultures were also
                     able to foster fear – fear of being overwhelmed by books and
                     paper. The end of the Gospel according to John 21.25 claims
                     that the world would not be able to contain everything that
                     could be written about Jesus’ stories, reflecting an anxiety
                     regarding a written knowledge able to absorb the world. Ann
                     Blair, in <cite class="title italic">Too Much to Know</cite>,
                     refreshes one’s mind by helping one to escape the academic
                     "amnesia" related to the 16<span class="hi superscript">th</span>-17<span class="hi superscript">th</span> centuries: she
                     pleads for us to use the term "information age"
                     anachronistically in a non technical way, underlining the
                     idea that "information management" has accompanied the
                     birth of the printed book [<a class="ref" href="#blair2010">Blair 2010</a>, l. 136]. She reminds us that "historians have pointed especially to three main
                     sources of information explosion in the Renaissance: the
                     discovery of new worlds, the recovery of ancient texts,
                     and the proliferation of printed books"
                     [<a class="ref" href="#blair2010">Blair 2010</a>, l.                     324–325]; in her book she
                     expands this point of view with examples from cultures with
                     limited or no contact with Western Europe. Such an approach,
                     opening the historical gates to a thoroughgoing perspective,
                     beyond Western cultures, is absolutely necessary to facing
                     the anxiety one can face today. The building of a bridge
                     between "old audiences" and "new audiences" is
                     required. Such a platform offers a stable ground that one
                     may move with Derrida from anxiety to the feeling of
                     "out-of-paper liberation" that he expresses so
                     strongly in the conclusion of his interview: "Because on the other hand, I also suffer,
                     to the point of suffocation, from <em class="emph">too much
                        paper</em>, and this is another spleen. Another
                     ecological sigh. How can we save the world
                     <em class="emph">from</em> paper? And its own body? So I
                     <em class="emph">also</em> dream of living paperless – and
                     sometimes that sounds to my ears like a definition or
                     'real life', of the living part of life. [...]
                     Let’s not count the books. So paper expels me – outside
                     my home. It chases me off. This time, it’s an <em class="emph">aut
                        aut</em>: paper <em class="emph">or</em> me."
                     [<a class="ref" href="#derrida2005">Derrida 2005</a>, 64]. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p19">19</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p19">Firstly, we can also find a sense of liberation when one goes
                     "out of the paper." Secondly, one has to bravely
                     assume that the objectivation of knowledge allowed by paper
                     is ending. From the Modern duality of subject-object
                     succeeds an era of intersubjectivity, of networking and
                     graphs. The responsibility of subjects to transport
                     knowledge and culture is increasingly at stake in such a
                     digital framework. If <cite class="title italic">Fahrenheit
                        451</cite> by Ray Bradbury was a science-fiction novel
                     in 1953, it sounds really less like that today. In
                     particular it illustrates how much our own bodies are the
                     covers of what we know and we transmit today. By surfing on
                     the waters of the "web," it is eminently our
                     responsibility to define, enclose and limit the pieces of
                     knowledge we still want to keep, preserve and transmit. In
                     printed culture, we had the secure boundaries of "chapter,
                     word, phrase, line," elements that allowed us to
                     consider texts as "massively addressable
                     [objects] at different levels of scale"
                     [<a class="ref" href="#witmore2010">Witmore 2010</a>]. Yet, as in the manuscript
                     culture of the first centuries C.E., even these boundaries
                     are not mandatory guarantees in the digital architexture
                     ocean. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p20">20</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p20">In consequence, a third step needs to be taken. It is surely
                     not enough to innovate by shrinking [<a class="ref" href="#goulet-vinck2009">Goulet-Vinck 2009</a>], we need a "creative
                     fury" according to Citton’s statement: "to improve intelligence and make the world
                     evolve"
                     [<a class="ref" href="#citton2010">Citton 2010</a>, l. 142–146]. In a quest for
                     this "creative fury," we can once more solicit the
                     reserves of Western historical memory and return to the
                     17<span class="hi superscript">th</span> century. To conclude,
                     one may borrow the excellent remarks made by Olivier Abel,
                     Ethics professor at the Protestant Institute of Theology
                     (Montpellier/Paris), concerning the buccaneers of this
                     century and the "capture anthropology" that emerges
                     from this particular style of life. Olivier Abel underlines
                     that: 
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>The time of the buccaneers was
                           particularly flourishing in the Caribbean between 1630
                           and 1670. In the new worlds, everything is offered with
                           profusion by the divine Providence. [...] We are not in
                           a gift and exchange economy any more, but in an economy
                           of the "capture", that stands even in the title of
                           the Dutch philosopher Grotius <cite class="title italic">On
                              the Right of Capture</cite>. The history tempest
                           has broken all links, and the pirate ship stands for the
                           multi-religious and multi-racial utopia of a free
                           adhesion, after the tempest, even if one adopts rules
                           harder, as in an anti-reality. [<a class="ref" href="#abel2009a">Abel 2009a</a>, 107]
                        </p>
                     </blockquote>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p21">21</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p21">The 17<span class="hi superscript">th</span> century, with this focus
                     on Grotius’ notion of the "right of capture" forms a
                     link to this article’s Part 2; it thus proves fruitful to
                     consider our digital transformation. Indeed, in 2011,
                     Johanna Drucker made the now-famous proposition to switch
                     from the notion of "data" to "capta": 
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>
                           Differences in the etymological
                           roots of the terms data and capta make the
                           distinction between constructivist and realist
                           approaches clear. <em class="emph">Capta</em> is "taken"
                           actively while <em class="emph">data</em> is assumed to be a
                           "given" able to be recorded and observed.
                           From this distinction, a world of differences
                           arises. Humanistic inquiry acknowledges the
                           situated, partial, and constitutive character of
                           knowledge production, the recognition that knowledge
                           is constructed, <em class="emph">taken</em>, not simply given
                           as a natural representation of pre-existing
                           fact.
                            [<a class="ref" href="#drucker2011">Drucker 2011</a>, §3]
                           
                        </p>
                     </blockquote> The notion of "capta" can be related to the
                     seldom-used French word "capitation," which means to
                     capture a part of heritage or some money.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e969">[9]</a> Whatever it is on the
                     digital ocean, or on the 17<span class="hi superscript">th</span>
                     century’s oceans, the act of capture seems to be the one
                     required by new open spaces and thence to grasp some parts
                     of our cultural heritage.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p22">22</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p22">After describing such an atmosphere, Abel pursues his
                     analysis in another article, arguing that out in the ocean
                     there is neither king nor pope any more, one stands alone
                     with God, one has left everything behind. Forced to live
                     everyday without knowing what will come in the next, one
                     quickly learns that it is impossible to possess the sea, to
                     keep it in one’s fingers. Nevertheless, seafaring
                     individuals are so unbound that they can contract new
                     alliances, free alliances: "the right to depart is the
                     condition of the capacity to be bound. The political
                     question will thus gradually become: 'How can we
                     stay together?' when we can always become
                     unbound?"
                      [<a class="ref" href="#abel2009b">Abel 2009b</a>, 115].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p23">23</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p23">Everything is said in the notion of: "the
                     right to depart is the condition of the capacity to be
                     bound." To exit the cover – to depart for lawless
                     regions of the ocean – provides the right to leave, to
                     depart. Since textuality has now – literally speaking – the
                     right to depart from the book, it can also contract free
                     alliances, with images, sounds, and all the other forms of
                     texts. During the 17<span class="hi superscript">th</span> century,
                     "since on the ocean everything is
                     going unbound, ceaselessly, one has to reconsider what
                     are moorings, ropes, ties, knots and pacts"
                     [<a class="ref" href="#abel2009a">Abel 2009a</a>, 108]. Today this is the role
                     of new technologies – to give us the right to break free
                     from the bindings and the front-pages of printed culture.
                     This is an obligation, one could say, because it is
                     impossible to possess the Internet ocean, to keep it inside
                     of our fingers, inside our humanity. The right to capture,
                     harvest, and select becomes the condition to bind, delimit
                     and draw a virtual cover. Humanities out of the book,
                     unbound, may force us to "go on board"! All our ways to
                     <em class="emph">net-work</em> and to bind will be then have to
                     be reconsidered.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Acknowledgments</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p24">24</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p24">With the kind permission of the editors, this English article
                     is based on the translation of a forthcoming French article
                     by Clivaz, C., "En quête des couvertures
                     et corpus. Quelques éclats d’humanités
                     digitales". In Carayol Valerie, Morandi Franc (eds.),
                     <cite class="title italic">Le Tournant Numérique des Sciences
                        Humaines et Sociales</cite>, Pessac, MSHA, 2015, p.
                     97-109. The author reformulated some sentences and expanded
                     some passages in this English version. Many thanks are due
                     to Harley Edwards for the English proof reading of this
                     article. I am also very grateful to the two anonymous
                     reviewers who brought important suggestions for improvements
                     as well as rich bibliographical references to this
                     article.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
               
            </div>
            
            <div id="notes">
               <h2>Notes</h2>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e324"><span class="noteRef">[1]</span> Stefan Gradman and Susan Schreibman, "Beyond Infrastructure: Further
                  Modeling the Scholarly Domain", oral
                  presentation at the DH2013 in Lincoln (19/07/13). The
                  expression is not present in the published abstract [<a class="ref" href="#schreibman2013">Schreibman 2013</a>].
               </div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e549"><span class="noteRef">[2]</span> See the website that presents the
                  Swiss moovie <cite class="title italic">If the Sun Were Never
                     to Return</cite>, <a class="ref" href="http://www.swissfilms.ch/fr/film_search/filmdetails/-/id_film/2146533716" onclick="window.open('http://www.swissfilms.ch/fr/film_search/filmdetails/-/id_film/2146533716'); return false">
                     http://www.swissfilms.ch/fr/film_search/filmdetails/-/id_film/2146533716</a>
                  (last accessed on 10/13/2015).
               </div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e667"><span class="noteRef">[3]</span> See also <cite class="title italic">Le Courrier
                     international : La fin de l’écriture</cite> 1194
                  (18 septembre 2013). See also my blog "La vengance de la gommette 2 : ne pas
                  trop vite crier au loup !", <a class="ref" href="http://claireclivaz.hypotheses.org/348" onclick="window.open('http://claireclivaz.hypotheses.org/348'); return false">http://claireclivaz.hypotheses.org/348</a> (last
                  accessed on 10/13/2015).
               </div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e708"><span class="noteRef">[4]</span> One can here refer to the thorough
                  reading by Emmanuèle Baumgartner (1999).
               </div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e722"><span class="noteRef">[5]</span>
                  See the Youtube video <cite class="title italic">Hands on with
                     iPhone 5S Touch ID fingerprint scanner</cite>. <a class="ref" href="http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lfIDSx2OHgQ" onclick="window.open('http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lfIDSx2OHgQ'); return false">http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lfIDSx2OHgQ</a>
                  (last accessed on 10/15/15).
               </div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e756"><span class="noteRef">[6]</span>
                  See for example this blog of synthesis by Justin Alford
                  on an artificial skin (<a class="ref" href="http://www.iflscience.com/technology/smart-artificial-skin-could-give-prosthetic-limbs-feeling" onclick="window.open('http://www.iflscience.com/technology/smart-artificial-skin-could-give-prosthetic-limbs-feeling'); return false">http://www.iflscience.com/technology/smart-artificial-skin-could-give-prosthetic-limbs-feeling</a>;
                  last accessed on 10/15/15).
               </div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e788"><span class="noteRef">[7]</span> See for Wikipedia.org guidelines : <a class="ref" href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Help:HTML_in_wikitext" onclick="window.open('https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Help:HTML_in_wikitext'); return false">https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Help:HTML_in_wikitext</a>
                  (last accessed on 10/15/15); see for Wikipedia.fr
                  guidelines, with the choic of the visual editor, or the
                  HTML5 editor: <a class="ref" href="https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aide:Comment_modifier_une_page_en_wikicode" onclick="window.open('https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aide:Comment_modifier_une_page_en_wikicode'); return false">https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aide:Comment_modifier_une_page_en_wikicode</a>
                  (last accessed on 10/15/15).
               </div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e801"><span class="noteRef">[8]</span> Swiss news,
                  10/11/15 : the University of Geneva (CH) organizes
                  Wikipedia training workshops for women : <a class="ref" href="http://www.rts.ch/play/tv/19h30/video/wikipedia-compte-tres-peu-de-collaboratrices?id=7159067" onclick="window.open('http://www.rts.ch/play/tv/19h30/video/wikipedia-compte-tres-peu-de-collaboratrices?id=7159067'); return false">http://www.rts.ch/play/tv/19h30/video/wikipedia-compte-tres-peu-de-collaboratrices?id=7159067</a>(last
                  accessed on 10/15/15).
               </div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e969"><span class="noteRef">[9]</span> See the
                  definition of the French dictionary <cite class="title italic">Larousse</cite>, <a class="ref" href="http://www.larousse.fr/dictionnaires/francais/captation/13011" onclick="window.open('http://www.larousse.fr/dictionnaires/francais/captation/13011'); return false">http://www.larousse.fr/dictionnaires/francais/captation/13011</a>(last
                  accessed on 10/15/15).
               </div>
            </div>
            <div id="worksCited">
               <h2>Works Cited</h2>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="abel2009a">
                     <!-- close -->Abel 2009a</span>  Olivier Abel.
                  "L’océan, le puritain, le
                  pirate,"
                  <cite class="title italic">Esprit</cite> 356
                  (2009), 104–10.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="abel2009b">
                     <!-- close -->Abel 2009b</span>  Olivier Abel.
                  "Essai sur la prise. Anthropologie
                  de la flibuste et théologie radicale
                  protestante,"
                  <cite class="title italic">Esprit</cite> 356 (2009b), 114–15;
                  <a class="ref" href=" http://olivierabel.fr/nuit-ethique-les-cultures-et-le-differend/pirates-puritains.php" onclick="window.open(' http://olivierabel.fr/nuit-ethique-les-cultures-et-le-differend/pirates-puritains.php'); return false">http://olivierabel.fr/nuit-ethique-les-cultures-et-le-differend/pirates-puritains.php</a>
                  (last accessed on 10/15/15). With Olivier Abel’s permission,
                  the online version is quoted, rather than the printed one,
                  since I prefer it.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="barthes1970">
                     <!-- close -->Barthes 1970</span>  Roland Barthes.
                  "L’ancienne rhétorique.
                  Aide-mémoire."
                  <cite class="title italic">Communications</cite> 16
                  (1970), 172–223.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="baumbach2002">
                     <!-- close -->Baumbach 2002</span>  Manuel
                  Baumbach. <cite class="title italic">Lukian in Deutschland. Eine
                     Forschungs-und Rezeptionsgeschichtliche Analyse vom
                     Humanismus bis zur Gegenwart</cite> (<cite class="title italic">Beihefte zu Poetica</cite> 25). Munich:
                  Verlag Wilhelm Fink, 2002.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="baumgartner1999">
                     <!-- close -->Baumgartner 1999</span> 
                  Emmanuèle Baumgarnter, "Du manuscrit
                  retrouvé au corps retrouvé." In <cite class="title italic">Le Topos du manuscrit trouvé. Actes du
                     colloque international Louvain-Gand</cite>, 22-23-24
                  mai 1997 [hommage à Christian Angelet]. Edited by Jan
                  Hermann, Fernand Hallyn and Kris Peeters. Leuven: Peeters,
                  1999, 1-14.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="belhoste1977">
                     <!-- close -->Belhoste 1977</span>  Bruno
                  Belhoste, "L’enseignement secondaire
                  français et les sciences au début du XX<span class="hi superscript">e</span> siècle. La réforme de 1902
                  des plans d’études et des programmes."
                  <cite class="title italic">Revue d’histoire des sciences</cite>
                  43 (1977): 371–400.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="blair2010">
                     <!-- close -->Blair 2010</span>  Ann Blair. <cite class="title italic">Too Much to Know</cite>. Yale: Yale
                  University Press, 2010. Kindle edition.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="citton2010">
                     <!-- close -->Citton 2010</span>  Yves Citton.
                  <cite class="title italic">L’Avenir des Humanités. Économie de
                     la connaissance ou culture de
                     l’interprétation ?</cite>. Paris: La Découverte, 2010.
                  Kindle edition.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="citton2013">
                     <!-- close -->Citton 2013</span>  Yves Citton,
                  "Transmettre les textes ne se limite
                  pas à transférer des connaissances."
                  <cite class="title italic">Le Monde</cite>, 21 mars 2013. <a class="ref" href="http://www.lemonde.fr/idees/article/2013/03/21/transmettre-les-textes-ne-se-limite-pas-a-transferer-des-connaissances_1852037_3232.html" onclick="window.open('http://www.lemonde.fr/idees/article/2013/03/21/transmettre-les-textes-ne-se-limite-pas-a-transferer-des-connaissances_1852037_3232.html'); return false">http://www.lemonde.fr/idees/article/2013/03/21/transmettre-les-textes-ne-se-limite-pas-a-transferer-des-connaissances_1852037_3232.html</a>
                  (last accessed on 03/15/2015).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="clivaz2015b">
                     <!-- close -->Clivaz 2015b</span>  Claire Clivaz.
                  "Mais où est le corps? L’homme
                  augmenté comme lieu des Humanités Digitales." In
                  <cite class="title italic">L’homme augmenté (eTalks)</cite>.
                  Edited by Philippe Bornet, Claire Clivaz, Nicole Durisch
                  Gauthier and Etienne Honoré. VITAL-DH, Swiss Institute of
                  Bioinformatics, 2015. <a class="ref" href="http://etalk2.vital-it.ch/?dir=Clivaz#0" onclick="window.open('http://etalk2.vital-it.ch/?dir=Clivaz#0'); return false">http://etalk2.vital-it.ch/?dir=Clivaz#0</a>(last
                  accessed 10/15/15). 
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="clivaz2012">
                     <!-- close -->Clivaz et al., 2012</span>  Claire
                  Clivaz, Jérôme Meizoz, François Vallotton and Joseph
                  Verheyden, with Benjamin Bertho. <cite class="title italic">Reading Tomorrow. From Ancient Manuscripts to the
                     Digital Era / Lire Demain. Des manuscrits antiques à
                     l’ère digitale</cite>. Lausanne: PPUR, 2012.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="clivaz2015a">
                     <!-- close -->Clivaz et al., 2015a</span>  Claire
                  Clivaz, Marion Rivoal and Martial Sankar. "A New Platform for Editing Digital
                  Multimedia: The eTalks." In <a class="ref" href="http://ebooks.iospress.nl/publication/40894" onclick="window.open('http://ebooks.iospress.nl/publication/40894'); return false"><cite class="title italic">New Avenues for Electronic
                        Publishing in the Age of Infinite Collections and
                        Citizen Science: Scale</cite></a>. Edited by
                  Birgit Schmidt and Milena Dobreva. Openness and Trust,
                  Amsterdam (The authors and IOS Press), 2015, 156–159 ; DOI :
                  10.3233/978-1-61499-562-3-156 ; <a class="ref" href="http://ebooks.iospress.nl/publication/40894" onclick="window.open('http://ebooks.iospress.nl/publication/40894'); return false">http://ebooks.iospress.nl/publication/40894</a>(last
                  accessed on 10/15/15).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="crosby1946">
                     <!-- close -->Crosby 1946</span>  Dion
                  Chrysostomus. "On Homer. Discourse
                  53,7." In <cite class="title italic">Dio
                     Chrysostom</cite>. Edited by Lamar Crosby, Volume 4.
                  Cambridge/Londres: Harvard University Press, 1946,
                  362–63.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="darton2009">
                     <!-- close -->Darton 2009</span>  Robert Darnton.
                  <cite class="title italic">The Case for Books: Past, Present,
                     Future</cite>. New York: PublicAffairs, 2009.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="derrida2005">
                     <!-- close -->Derrida 2005</span>  Jacques
                  Derrida, "Paper of me, You Know… (New
                  Speculations on a Luxury of the Poor.)" In <cite class="title italic">Paper Machine</cite>, 2<span class="hi superscript">nd</span> ed. Edited by Jacques
                  Derrida. Translated by the Board of Trustees (Stanford).
                  Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2005, 41–65; <a class="ref" href="http://users.clas.ufl.edu/burt/Derridapaperorme.pdf" onclick="window.open('http://users.clas.ufl.edu/burt/Derridapaperorme.pdf'); return false">http://users.clas.ufl.edu/burt/Derridapaperorme.pdf</a>
                  (last accessed on 10/15/15).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="descamps2005">
                     <!-- close -->Descamps 2005</span>  Florence
                  Descamps. <cite class="title italic">L’Historien, l’archiviste et
                     le magnétophone</cite> (<cite class="title italic">Histoire
                     économique XIX</cite><span class="hi superscript">e</span><span class="hi italic">-XX</span><span class="hi superscript">e</span><span class="hi italic"> siècle</span>). Paris: Comité pour
                  l’histoire économique et financière de la France/IGPDE,
                  2005. <a class="ref" href="http://books.openedition.org/igpde/438" onclick="window.open('http://books.openedition.org/igpde/438'); return false">http://books.openedition.org/igpde/438</a> (last
                  accessed on 10/15/15).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="doll2012">
                     <!-- close -->Doll, 2012</span>  Jen Doll, "Cursive May Die, But We’ll Talk About It
                  Endlessly First."
                  <cite class="title italic">The Atlantic Wire</cite>, 9 juillet
                  2012; <a class="ref" href="http://www.theatlanticwire.com/entertainment/2012/07/cursive-may-die-well-talk-about-it-endlessly-first/54337/" onclick="window.open('http://www.theatlanticwire.com/entertainment/2012/07/cursive-may-die-well-talk-about-it-endlessly-first/54337/'); return false">http://www.theatlanticwire.com/entertainment/2012/07/cursive-may-die-well-talk-about-it-endlessly-first/54337/</a>
                  (last accessed on 10/15/15).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="drucker2011">
                     <!-- close -->Drucker 2011</span>  Johanna
                  Drucker, "Humanities Approaches to
                  Graphical Display."
                  <cite class="title italic">DHQ</cite> 5.1 (2011): <a class="ref" href=" http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/5/1/000091/000091.html" onclick="window.open(' http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/5/1/000091/000091.html'); return false">http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/5/1/000091/000091.html</a></div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="eggert2013">
                     <!-- close -->Eggert 2013</span>  Paul Eggert.
                  "Apparatus, text, interface: how to
                  read a printed critical edition." In <cite class="title italic">Cambridge Companion to Textual
                     Scholarship</cite>. Edited by Neil Fraistat and Julia
                  Flanders. Cambridge (MA): Cambridge Unviersity Press, 2013,
                  97–118.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="erasmus1910">
                     <!-- close -->Erasmus 1910</span>  Desiderius
                  Erasmus, <cite class="title italic">Opus epistolarum Des. Erasmi
                     Roterodami / denuo recognitum et auctum per P. Allen,
                     H.M. Allen, H. W. Garrod</cite>, vol. II, Oxonii : in
                  Typ. Clarendoniano, 1910.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="erne2013">
                     <!-- close -->Erne 2013</span>  Lukas Erne, <cite class="title italic">Shakespeare as Literary Dramatist</cite>.
                  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013. Second kindle
                  edition.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="fabre2013">
                     <!-- close -->Fabre 2013</span>  Joëlle Fabre,
                  "Le monde au bout des doigts.
                  Humanités Digitales. Ressusciter le passé est l’une des
                  promesses du savoir numérisé."
                  <cite class="title italic">24Heures</cite>, 12 September 2013,
                  36.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="furet-ouzouf1977">
                     <!-- close -->Furet-Ouzouf 1977</span> 
                  François Furet and Jacques Ozouf. <cite class="title italic">Lire
                     et écrire. La scolarisation des Français de Calvin à
                     Jules Ferry</cite>. Paris: Minuit, 1977.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="garuti2013">
                     <!-- close -->Garuti 2013</span>  Paolo Garuti.
                  "Cultes et (natu-)culture dans
                  l’Apocalypse de Jean: les emprunts à l’imagerie
                  d’origine hellénistique, romaine ou indo-iranienne comme
                  phénomène de perception de la 'nature'."
                  <cite class="title italic">Angelicum</cite> 90 (2013),
                  57–86.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="genette1992">
                     <!-- close -->Genette 1992</span>  Gérard Genette.
                  <cite class="title italic">The Architext. An
                     Introduction</cite>. Translated by Jane E. Lewin.
                  Berkeley, Los Angeles and Oxford: University of California
                  Press, 1992.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="gorce1962">
                     <!-- close -->Gorce 1962</span>  Denys Gorce. <cite class="title italic">Vie de Sainte Mélanie</cite> (<cite class="title italic">SC</cite> 90), Paris, Éditions du Cerf,
                  1962.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="goulet-vinck2009">
                     <!-- close -->Goulet-Vinck 2009</span> 
                  Frédéric Goulet and Dominique Vinck. "L’innovation par retrait. Contribution à une sociologie
                  du détachement."
                  <cite class="title italic">Revue française de sociologie</cite>
                  53/3 (2009), 195–224.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="krans2006">
                     <!-- close -->Krans 2006</span>  Jan Krans, <cite class="title italic">Beyond What Is Written: Erasmus and Beza
                     as Conjectural Critics of the New
                     Testament</cite> (<cite class="title italic">NTTS</cite> 35). Leiden / Boston: Brill, 2006.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="latour2010">
                     <!-- close -->Latour 2010</span>  Bruno Latour,
                  <cite class="title italic">On the Modern Cult of the Factish
                     Gods</cite> (<cite class="title italic">Science and Cultural
                     Theory</cite>). Duke: Duke University Press,
                  2010.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="luteaud2013">
                     <!-- close -->Luteaud 2013</span>  Bénédicte
                  Luteaud. "Apprendre à écrire ne sera
                  plus obligatoire dans les écoles de 45 États
                  américains."
                  <cite class="title italic">Quoi.info</cite>, 21 février 2013;
                  <a class="ref" href="http://quoi.info/actualite-education/2013/02/21/apprendre-a-ecrire-a-lecole-bientot-demode-1161153/" onclick="window.open('http://quoi.info/actualite-education/2013/02/21/apprendre-a-ecrire-a-lecole-bientot-demode-1161153/'); return false">http://quoi.info/actualite-education/2013/02/21/apprendre-a-ecrire-a-lecole-bientot-demode-1161153/</a>
                  (last accessed on 10/15/15).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="meizoz2007">
                     <!-- close -->Meizoz 2007 and 2011</span>  Jérôme
                  Meizoz. <cite class="title italic">Postures littéraires I et
                     II</cite>. Genève, Slatkine, 2007 and 2011.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="ong2002">
                     <!-- close -->Ong 2002</span>  Walter Ong. <cite class="title italic">Orality and Literacy: The Technologizing
                     of the Word</cite>. New York: Routledge, 2002.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="parker2009">
                     <!-- close -->Parker 2009</span>  David Parker.
                  "The Date of Codex Zacynthius (Ξ): A
                  New Proposal." In <cite class="title italic">Manuscripts, Texts, Theology. Collected Papers
                     1977-2007</cite> (<cite class="title italic">ANTT</cite> 40). Edited by David Parker. Berlin/New York:
                  Walter de Gruyter, 2009, 113–19.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="ranke2000">
                     <!-- close -->Ranke 2000</span>  Leopold von Ranke,
                  <cite class="title italic">Geschichte der Germanischen Völker.
                     Fürsten und Völker die Geschichte der romanischen und
                     germanischen Völker von 1494 bis 1514</cite>. Genève:
                  Wiesbaden, Emil Vollmer Verlag, 2000.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="samosate2010">
                     <!-- close -->Samosata 2010</span>  Lucian of
                  Samosata. <cite class="title italic">Comment il faut écrire
                     l’histoire </cite>(<cite class="title italic">La roue à
                     livres</cite> 55). Edited by André Husrt. Paris: Les
                  Belles Lettres, 2010.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="schreibman2013">
                     <!-- close -->Schreibman 2013</span>  Susan
                  Schreibman, Stefan Gradmann, Steffen Hennicke, Tobias
                  Blanke, Sally Chambers, et. al. (2013). <a class="ref" href="http://dh2013.unl.edu/abstracts/files/downloads/DH2013_conference_abstracts_print.pdf" onclick="window.open('http://dh2013.unl.edu/abstracts/files/downloads/DH2013_conference_abstracts_print.pdf'); return false">http://dh2013.unl.edu/abstracts/files/downloads/DH2013_conference_abstracts_print.pdf</a>
                  "Beyond Infrastructure – Modelling
                  Scholarly Research and Collaboration." In <cite class="title italic">Digital Humanities 2013: Conference
                     Abstracts</cite>, University of Nebraska–Lincoln, USA,
                  16-19 July 2013, 386-389.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="sernier2013">
                     <!-- close -->Sernier 2013</span>  Emilien
                  Sernier, "C.F. Ramuz, Œuvres complètes
                  vol. 27: Romans (1932-1937)."
                  <cite class="title italic">Fabula</cite> 28 août 2013. <a class="ref" href="http://www.fabula.org/actualites/cf-ramuz-oeuvres-completes-vol-27-romans-1932-1937_58276.php" onclick="window.open('http://www.fabula.org/actualites/cf-ramuz-oeuvres-completes-vol-27-romans-1932-1937_58276.php'); return false">http://www.fabula.org/actualites/cf-ramuz-oeuvres-completes-vol-27-romans-1932-1937_58276.php</a>
                  (last accessed on 10/15/15).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="vanpeursen2010">
                     <!-- close -->Van Peursen 2010</span>  Wido van
                  Peursen. "Text Comparison and Digital
                  Creativity: An Introduction." In <cite class="title italic">Text Comparison and Digital Creativity.
                     The Production of Presence and Meaning in Digital Text
                     Scholarship</cite> (<cite class="title italic">Scholarly
                     Communication</cite> 1). Edited by Wido van Peursen,
                  Ernst D. Thoutenhoofd and Adrian Van der Weel. Brill,
                  Leiden, 2010, 1–27.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="witmore2010">
                     <!-- close -->Witmore 2010</span>  Michael
                  Witmore, "Text: A Massively Addressable
                  Object." In <cite class="title italic">Wine Dark
                     Sea</cite> blog. 3<span class="hi superscript">rd</span>
                  Decembre 2011, <a class="ref" href="http://winedarksea.org/?p=926" onclick="window.open('http://winedarksea.org/?p=926'); return false">http://winedarksea.org/?p=926</a>(last accessed on
                  10/15/15).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="yunis2003">
                     <!-- close -->Yunis 2003</span>  Harvey Yunis,
                  "Writing for Reading. Thucydides,
                  Plato, and the Emergence of the Critical Reader."
                  In <cite class="title italic">Written Texts and the Rise of
                     Literate Culture in Ancient Greece</cite>. Edited by
                  Harvey Yunis. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003,
                  189-212.
               </div>
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar"><a href="#">Preview</a>  |  <span style="color: grey">XML</span> |  <a href="#" onclick="javascript:window.print();" title="Click for print friendly version">Print Article</a></div>
         </div>
      </div>
   </body>
</html>