<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
      <title>[PREVIEW] DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly: </title>
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_screen.css" media="screen" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_print.css" media="print" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" /><style type="text/css">
        #mainContent {
          float: none;
          padding-top: 2em;
          padding-left: 4em;
          padding-right: 4em;
          margin-left: 225px;
           
        }</style></head>
   <body>
      <div id="mainContent">
         <div class="DHQarticle">
            <div id="pubInfo">Preview<br />Volume  Number 
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar">
               <form id="taporware" action="get">
                  <div><a href="//preview/index.html">Preview</a>
                      | 
                     <a rel="external" href="//vol///000463.xml">XML</a>
                     
                     | 
                     		   Discuss
                     			(<a href="/dhq/vol///000463/000463.html#disqus_thread" data-disqus-identifier="000463">
                        				Comments
                        			</a>)
                     
                  </div>
               </form>
            </div>
            
            <div class="DHQheader">
               
               
               
               
               <h1 class="articleTitle lang en">Scholarly Infrastructure as Critical Argument:
                  Nine principles in a preliminary survey of the bibliographic and critical values
                  expressed by scholarly web-portals for visualizing data
               </h1>
               
               
               <div class="author"><span style="color: grey">Jo Guldi
                     </span> &lt;<a href="mailto:" onclick="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate(''); return false;" onkeypress="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate(''); return false;"></a>&gt;, Southern Methodist University
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               <span class="Z3988" title="url_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;rft_val_fmt=info%3Aofi%2Ffmt%3Akev%3Amtx%3Ajournal&amp;rfr_id=info%3Asid%2Fzotero.org%3A2&amp;rft.genre=article&amp;rft.atitle=Scholarly%20Infrastructure%20as%20Critical%20Argument%3A%20Nine%20principles%20in%20a%20preliminary%20survey%20of%20the%20bibliographic%20and%20critical%20values%20expressed%20by%20scholarly%20web-portals%20for%20visualizing%20data&amp;rft.jtitle=Digital%20Humanities%20Quarterly&amp;rft.stitle=DHQ&amp;rft.issn=1938-4122&amp;rft.date=&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.aulast=Guldi&amp;rft.aufirst=Jo&amp;rft.au=Jo%20Guldi"> </span></div>
            
            <div id="DHQtext">
               
               
               <div id="abstract">
                  <h2>Abstract</h2>
                  
                  
                  <p>Infrastructure in politics is analogous to physical infrastructure: sewer and
                     power lines have to be connected together in order to accomplish their goals.
                     For a more organic analogy, think about the circulation system, or
                     musculoskeletal system, which requires connective tissue. The first problem
                     facing progressives with regard to infrastructure is that the pieces are not
                     connected. [No date on web page. Earliest version in Internet Archive is 13 July
                     2017.]
                  </p>
                  
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p1">1</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p1"> We live in a world connected not merely by technology but also by
                     infrastructure, which seamlessly delivers data to our doors. What’s more, in
                     today’s university, many a professor has become a designer of infrastructure as
                     well as a consumer. While portals of this kind are developed by a minority of
                     practicing scholars, they form one of the major digital complements that
                     scholars tend to create for their traditional work. The reasons for this are
                     seldom explicitly articulated in the existing literature that documents their
                     use and purpose. The creation of public tools for visualizing data is
                     increasingly important to many scholars, and it represents a non-negligible
                     commitment in terms of time and grant money. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p2">2</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p2"> This article argues that that choice and commitment are best understood as a
                     kind of work deeply informed by an engagement with certain <em class="emph">values</em>,
                     including scholarly transparency and political participation, which often align
                     with scholars’ moral commitments, intellectual heritage, and disciplinary
                     traditions. Indeed, that alignment has been so powerful for many builders of
                     scholarly data that they have chosen to pursue the building of infrastructure
                     projects even when that choice was otherwise out of alignment with recognizable
                     promotion incentives in their professional communities. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p3">3</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p3"> In many cases, the infrastructure project advances an argument: but if web
                     portals existed merely to convey arguments to a broader audience, they could
                     just as easily take the form of an open-access article or monography. Why, then,
                     would a scholar or a scholarly team choose to invest their energy in designing
                     and constructing a web project? 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p4">4</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p4"> The pages that follow then attempt to answer the question: what values does
                     infrastructure-building represent? This article begins by situating scholarly
                     practices around infrastructure within a broader transformation of twenty-first
                     century life and indeed scholarship and learning by infrastructures, and
                     distinguishing “scholarly” infrastructure from other kinds of
                     infrastructure designed to share information that nevertheless lack scholarly
                     engagement with analysis. The article next attempts to excavate a set of
                     implicit values, while making room for the possibility that the list of values
                     put forward here is only incomplete, and that the list of values itself is the
                     subject of potential debate, critique, or dissent, some of which may take the
                     form of building infrastructures differently than the patterns laid out here. A
                     first section outlines a set of “bibliographic” values; while the article’s
                     second half turns to the power dynamics of infrastructure and a set of
                     “critical ” values encompassed by particular projects, before turning
                     to the issue of why understanding these values is so essential to understanding
                     infrastructure projects as a form of scholarly production that merit support and
                     recognition by the community at large. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p5">5</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p5"> The principles and case-studies here suggest that infrastructure represents a
                     conscientious choice about the format for disseminating that argument that
                     reflects critical thinking about the value of scholarship. In designing
                     infrastructure, many scholars today are amplifying the values embedded in their
                     scholarship – whether values of accessibility, of replicability, or even of the
                     political critique of institutions – and that for this reason, infrastructure
                     needs to be looked on as a particular kind of gesture, one that not merely
                     critiques the world but attempts to actively remake it. The author’s personal
                     history as a theorist/historian of infrastructure and sometime builder of
                     infrastructure are offered by way of laying out the importance of the scholarly
                     community engaging with the critical issues represented by a choice to build –
                     and the hazards to professional careers that can occur when activities of this
                     kind are undertheorized, underengaged, or otherwise underappreciated.
                     Infrastructure thereby deserves to be elevated within a humanistic discourse
                     that privileges action as well as contemplation. 
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Of Infrastructure</h1>
                  
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p6">6</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p6"> Web portals that visualize data may strike many scholars as a strange place to
                     begin a discussion of infrastructure. Visualizing data, of course, is but part
                     from the whole, even as a physical mailbox is invisibly connected to a network
                     of roads and trains, law and labor, standards and trust — so familiar that it
                     too disappears into the background of landscape taken everywhere for granted —
                     which allows letters posted in one continent to be delivered promptly to another
                     quarter of the world within days. The colossus of infrastructure that has
                     developed in university libraries and digital humanities centers to make
                     possible the scraping, cleaning, and serving of data is the subject of a great
                     deal of documentation, much of which takes the role of making visible otherwise
                     invisible commitments of expense, labor, maintenance, and ideation. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p7">7</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p7"> As understood in its broadest form, infrastructure encompasses any use of
                     technology or information which connects communities. Science and technology
                     scholars such as Janet Vertesi have defined infrastructure in terms of a
                     technology or management structure distinguished by its deliberate design, its
                     scale, its capacity to deliver information, and, frequently, its invisibility
                     [<a class="ref" href="#vertesi2019">Vertesi and Ribers 2019</a>, 263–4]. In the digital age, new
                     infrastructures have rapidly transformed how ordinary citizens as well as
                     scholars access information. Individuals read e-books, consult maps, and digest
                     newspapers whose delivery depends upon a vast infrastructure system ranging from
                     transoceanic cables to smart phones <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#starosielski2015">#starosielski2015</a></span>
                     <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#sawyer2019">#sawyer2019</a></span>. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p8">8</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p8">Meanwhile, scholarship too has grown to depend increasingly on a world of
                     invisible technologies. Already in 2010, Geoffrey Rockwell described an “infrastructure turn” that was shaping how a majority of
                     scholars accessed data [<a class="ref" href="#rockwell2010">Rockwell 2010</a>], which entailed new worlds
                     of labor, storage, and expense for universities, much of which required new
                     skills at managing digital data. Tara McPherson, founder and editor of a journal
                     that provided one infrastructure for delivering digital projects to readers,
                     described the creation of a “broader culture of
                     experimentation and change” among faculty, particularly those with a
                     specialty in visual analysis, as requiring new developments in infrastructure
                     that would service, validate, and share faculty experiments – from accessible to
                     journals tenure and review processes [<a class="ref" href="#mcpherson2010">McPherson 2010</a>].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p9">9</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p9"> Indeed, a broad range of institutional players came into being at most
                     universities and within many disciplines, including digital humanities centers,
                     digital humanities majors, institutional repositories, and new guidelines for
                     dissertation-writing and for the tenure and promotion of faculty [<a class="ref" href="#gold2018">Gold 2018</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#clement2017">Clement et al. 2017</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#flanders2013">Flanders and Hamlin 2013</a>]. Libraries began to engage data storage, standards
                     that define the data, the data itself, metadata, and applications that retrieve
                     and serve the data, as well as hardware, software, and structures for the
                     management of labor <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#mattern2014">#mattern2014</a></span>. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p10">10</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p10"> Researchers can turn to an emerging field of similarly interoperable tools that
                     put quantitative analysis of texts within the grasp of textual scholars from any
                     tradition in the humanities or social sciences. Among those tools are <a href="https://www.lib.uchicago.edu/efts/ARTFL/philologic/" onclick="window.open('https://www.lib.uchicago.edu/efts/ARTFL/philologic/'); return false" class="ref"><cite class="title italic">PhiloLogic</cite></a>,UChicago’s browser for topic-modeling text, analyzing word co-occurrence
                     and re-use; <a href="https://www.hypershelf.org/" onclick="window.open('https://www.hypershelf.org/'); return false" class="ref"><cite class="title italic">InPho Topic Explorer</cite></a>, which allows users to apply topic modeling to their own body of text;
                     <a href="https://voyant-tools.org/" onclick="window.open('https://voyant-tools.org/'); return false" class="ref"><cite class="title italic">Voyant</cite></a>, a simple web-interface which allows the user to pipe a selection of text
                     through a variety of visualizations; <a href="https://hdlab.stanford.edu/palladio/" onclick="window.open('https://hdlab.stanford.edu/palladio/'); return false" class="ref"><cite class="title italic">Palladio</cite></a>, Stanford’s application for visualizing correspondence such as letters
                     within a social network; <a href="https://www.cortext.net/" onclick="window.open('https://www.cortext.net/'); return false" class="ref"><cite class="title italic">CorTexT</cite></a>, Jean-Philippe Cointet’s extremely flexible and strong tool for
                     language-based analysis on a body of text with temporal metadata; and <a href="https://archivesunleashed.org/" onclick="window.open('https://archivesunleashed.org/'); return false" class="ref"><cite class="title italic">Archives Unleashed</cite></a>, Ian Milligan’s toolbox for digital humanities and social sciences
                     analysis of archives. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p11">11</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p11"> There are also, of course, individual repositories of texts that offer
                     particular tools for a unique set of documents, especially JSTOR’s data for
                     research portal, the online instance of the <a href="http://oldbaileyonline.org/" onclick="window.open('http://oldbaileyonline.org/'); return false" class="ref"><cite class="title italic">Old Bailey</cite></a>, as well as an expanding range of online portals for individual moments
                     in time; those covered in this article include <a href="http://slavevoyages.org/" onclick="window.open('http://slavevoyages.org/'); return false" class="ref"><cite class="title italic">Slave Voyages</cite></a>, the <a href="https://www.ucl.ac.uk/lbs/" onclick="window.open('https://www.ucl.ac.uk/lbs/'); return false" class="ref"><cite class="title italic">Legacies of the British Slave-Ownership</cite></a> project, and <a href="http://xpmethod.plaintext.in/torn-apart/volume/2/index" onclick="window.open('http://xpmethod.plaintext.in/torn-apart/volume/2/index'); return false" class="ref"><cite class="title italic">Torn Apart/Separados</cite></a>, a project that documents the contemporary incarceration of immigrants
                     and their families in the U.S. Effort will be made in this discussion to
                     foreground the author’s personal experience of the successes and failures of the
                     <a href="http://papermachines.org/" onclick="window.open('http://papermachines.org/'); return false" class="ref"><cite class="title italic">Paper Machines</cite></a> experiment, and the strengths of the infrastructure that supplanted it,
                     towards a genealogy of the design principles appropriate to infrastructure in
                     the humanities and social sciences. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p12">12</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p12">Scholarly creation of infrastructure has become a primary realm of critical
                     encounter with public narratives about culture, identity, and the past. Scholars
                     who have engaged this space have forged an entirely new modality of scholarly
                     publishing, one with tremendous power to shape public discourse. It is not
                     clear, however, that all forms of infrastructure constitute a critical
                     intervention in scholarship. The <a href="http://archive.org/" onclick="window.open('http://archive.org/'); return false" class="ref">Internet
                        Archive</a> is a stalwart repository for preserving the historical
                     artifacts, the creation of which surely constituted a political act in its time.
                     Many of its sub-collections – for instance, troves of anthropological films
                     collected by universities over decades — represent some work of critical
                     scholarship. Nevertheless, it would be hard to argue that the Internet Archive’s
                     little-curated collection of historical objects represents a scholarly
                     intervention in any particular field. While not a scholarly piece of
                     infrastructure by design, the Internet Archive’s voluminous collections of
                     scanned books, archival videos, and recordings nevertheless consists of a
                     “potential ”site of future critical interventions such as OCR,
                     metadata, preservation, and collection analysis. Thus the distinction between
                     scholarly and non-scholarly infrastructure is not hard and fast. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p13">13</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p13"> In a critical review of existing digital humanities and social sciences
                     projects, I have attempted to derive an overview of the values that motivated
                     those projects via their expression in public-facing websites. The idea that a
                     piece of infrastructure may encapsulate scholarly values is premised, in the
                     first place, upon the implicit understanding that the designers of
                     infrastructure have already made critical argumentation, embedded within the
                     larger culture of critical thinking about technology and culture, and inspired
                     by its insights. In other words, this article advances the proposition that the
                     design of infrastructure, when it engages critically with existing thought about
                     power, represents a form of scholarly argumentation. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p14">14</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p14"> In the following sections, this article will take the first step towards
                     articulating some principles that define the culture of infrastructure. These
                     principles are divided in two parts, reflecting the distance between the
                     concepts of “scholarship” and “criticality” that I have teased apart
                     in the introduction. A set of “bibliographic” principles of infrastructure
                     describe the principles that bring data into alignment with traditional
                     bibliophilic concerns about verifiability and fact in the liberal arts,
                     including web tools that link directly back to particular manuscripts in
                     particular archives. A set of “critical” principles of infrastructure
                     describe the kind of interventions that render the invisible visible, and which
                     otherwise mirror the kind of critical thinking called upon by Arendt and others
                     as a liberatory intervention in the public sphere. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p15">15</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p15">The principles advanced in this essay are merely a starting point – a review of
                     possible sources, both from the traditional humanities and social sciences and
                     from critical politics, which begins with an autobiographical narrative of the
                     author’s own participation in the design and building of a piece of
                     infrastructure. It is hoped that this starter list of principles will be amended
                     and argued with, towards the creation of a more critical discourse about what
                     humanistic infrastructure looks like and where critical thinking takes place,
                     with the expected outcome of generating a scholarly discourse about the choices
                     made in designing infrastructures for the public. An essay of this kind affords
                     an opportunity to reflect on the public purposes and intellectual orientation
                     intended in the building of infrastructure, and the extent to which humanities
                     and social science critiques of the flow of information and power in society
                     have resulted in the creation of alternative or transformative flows. 
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Infrastructure as Proto-Argumentation</h1>
                  
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p16">16</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p16">In enabling the researcher to efficiently identify the patterns that characterize
                     a vast scale of documents, infrastructure can seed dozens or hundreds of
                     scholarly arguments. The infrastructure thus represents a
                     <em class="term">proto-argument</em>, if not an argument or analysis itself. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p17">17</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p17">What do I mean by <em class="term">proto-argument</em>? An infrastructure contains
                     constraints that structure and direct the format of the argument eventually
                     produced over them, even as the shape of opera houses in London and Turin framed
                     civic ambitions, structuring how later compositions, libretti, and performances
                     would be received; those opera houses hosted hundreds or thousands of later
                     productions. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p18">18</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p18">In relationships of this kind, the architect’s work was often to envision and
                     crystallize a set of intellectual values and ideological ambitions latent in
                     opera. As historians of the opera have reasoned, the work of the architect was
                     to offer a framework of imagination that included “civic
                     ambition,”
                     “unabashed commercialism,” and “international cosmopolitanism,” which ran in parallel to textual
                     forms of argument-making about history, civic identity, and teleology [<a class="ref" href="#aspden2019">Aspden 2019</a>, 6]. Indeed, the opera house structured the
                     reception of operas within a “penumbra of
                     exclusivity” that mirrored the social structuring of other forms of
                     enlightenment knowledge [<a class="ref" href="#aspden2019">Aspden 2019</a>]. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p19">19</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p19">Hence the “proto” in <em class="term">proto-argument</em>. The architect’s work
                     codified enlightenment values into a structure that would both enhance later
                     performances, extend the potential of the. The creation of the vessel represents
                     the moment in time when an ideology is crystallized into a form where it can be
                     replicated. Much of the work of conceptualizing what <cite class="title italic">Aida</cite> — as an epic about the tragedy of gender, race, and empire —
                     might be was thus the work of a generation of architects and opera-designers who
                     worked previous to Verdi’s masterpiece. Similarly, the infrastructure allows the
                     application of one <em class="emph">theory</em> of text or temporality to a million data
                     sets. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p20">20</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p20">Architecture and infrastructure both function simultaneously as creation, vessel,
                     and constraint. They are proto-arguments in the sense that they structure the
                     natural course of use, exchange, and argumentation that follows from an original
                     design. One cannot stage a Brechtian play in an opera house. In a state of
                     disaffection, one might <em class="emph">imagine</em> dissolving the fourth wall from the
                     opera house at Turin, but one would have to build a totally different kind of
                     theater in order to realize it. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p21">21</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p21">Similarly, scholarly infrastructures that curate particular choices of word
                     analysis – grammar, topic, bag-of-words; transparent or not, open to
                     interpretation or not – package an entire system of understanding about what a
                     text is, what components of grammatical and semiotic structure or historical
                     context matter, and who is allowed to participate in the interpretation of text.
                     Scholarly infrastructure can be designed in such a way as to elucidate the
                     critical function of scholarship or to diminish it; and to expand public access
                     to polysemous interpretations or battles over the historical record or to
                     channel them. All of those choices have enormous downstream implications for
                     what scholarship can be executed, published, or received. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p22">22</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p22">Builder-scholars, over the last decade, have made legion critical decisions that
                     open up corpora to possible kinds of engagement. <a href="https://books.google.com/ngrams" onclick="window.open('https://books.google.com/ngrams'); return false" class="ref">Google Ngrams</a> does not allow
                     the scholar to inquire about word co-location as PhiloLogic does; Cortext allows
                     the user to highlight discontinuities in time in a way that few other resources
                     do; each innovation in analysis represents an opening to a critical question,
                     informed by concerns in linguistics or history, bringing the theories of
                     disciplines into alignment with algorithms and corpus in such a way as to
                     <em class="emph">scale </em> theory into an analysis with new documents. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p23">23</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p23">Builder-scholars are also, as I shall argue below, responsible for making choices
                     that govern who has the opportunity to inspect, to use, or to interpret data,
                     thus structuring entire communities of knowledge. The builder’s decisions – to
                     model gender or not, to open the structure, to an enormous degree, whether and
                     how fluidly later scholars who use the infrastructure will be able to compare
                     the use of gender, race, or class in the text; whether hours, days, years, or
                     decades of change over time are susceptible to analysis; and who is allowed to
                     make that analysis – whether a scholarly elite or anyone at all. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p24">24</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p24">To embrace this perspective made atop a web portal is to highlight the hybridity
                     of labor in discoveries, where both the design of infrastructure and the
                     scholarly analysis built upon those discoveries are crucial. When an
                     award-winning paper is published that relies on the metrics of gender difference
                     encoded in historical data made available by a public-facing portal, is the
                     award properly given to the paper’s author, or to the website’s designer, who
                     identified gender difference as a key component of that data, fit the data with
                     the correct algorithm for analysis, and made the results available? Arguably,
                     the award would properly be given to both: not only because the paper would be
                     impossible without the labor of the data, but also because a large portion of
                     the critical perspective implicit in the paper was given in advance by the
                     infrastructure. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p25">25</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p25">Above all, this line of reasoning underscores that the design and building of
                     portals is itself an act of imagination, and possible critique. In the following
                     section, I will propose some general lines of reasoning about what kinds of
                     imagination and critique the present generations of portals embody.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">The Bibliographic Principles of Scholarly Infrastructure </h1>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">The Principle of Transparency with Respect to a Document Base.</h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p26">26</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p26">One challenge of interoperability is making sure that the origin and nature
                        of artifacts is preserved, even as information is exchanged. A variety of
                        tools – including <a href="https://omeka.org/" onclick="window.open('https://omeka.org/'); return false" class="ref"><cite class="title italic">Omeka</cite></a> and <a href="https://duraspace.org/fedora/" onclick="window.open('https://duraspace.org/fedora/'); return false" class="ref"><cite class="title italic">Fedora Commons</cite></a> — make possible the tracking of metadata about archival objects <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#gourley2010">#gourley2010</a></span>. A user in the humanities needs always to know
                        on what documents and particular words a visualization is based. Only in
                        this way can the user defend herself against the critical challenges of
                        readers who will want to know if a homonym has been used in different sense,
                        if a single word example counted by a computer is based on an OCR error, or
                        if the statement counted as an earnest example of nationalism was made in
                        jest. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p27">27</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p27"> For this reason, it is crucial that humanities infrastructure be designed so
                        that every visualization is transparent. Each visualization based on data in
                        an archive should be clickable; each word or point on a chart should link to
                        another page that cites the documents and passages represented by that
                        analysis. Ideally, each list of citations should link back to the snippet of
                        original text that was counted to create the analysis. Where copyright
                        allows, that snippet of original text would link back to the original scan
                        of the document itself. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p28">28</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p28"> The University of Chicago’s <a href="http://guides.lib.uchicago.edu/efts/philologic" onclick="window.open('http://guides.lib.uchicago.edu/efts/philologic'); return false" class="ref"><cite class="title italic">PhiloLogic</cite></a> platform is a paragon of this value: visualizations of keyword
                        prevalence over time can be linked to original passages in the text, which
                        link back to chapter and edition, with the result that the scholar is always
                        clear about upon which original texts a visualization is based, and how
                        those individual parts of the text relate to a larger text and cycle of
                        publication. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p29">29</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p29">
                        <cite class="title italic">Paper Machines</cite> singularly failed with regard to
                        this principle of clickability, but other infrastructures are more
                        satisfying. In <cite class="title italic">PhiloLogic</cite>, each visualization
                        of word counts over time links to a list of documents and passages that
                        links to the original text in its context. In the <a href="https://www.oldbaileyonline.org/" onclick="window.open('https://www.oldbaileyonline.org/'); return false" class="ref"><cite class="title italic">Old Bailey</cite></a>, keyword searches and crime searches link back to passages that link
                        to the original scans of the document. The user is never deluded with
                        respect to the evidence and where it comes from. Adherence to the Principle
                        of Transparency with Respect to a Document Base ensures that users, both
                        scholarly and vernacular, can link abstract word counts to original text,
                        whether by looking up the citation given or through a link to a verbatim
                        copy of an original text. 
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">The Principle of Interoperability with Existing Documents.</h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p30">30</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p30">A basic orientation of Paper Machines that the prosthesis must be
                        interoperable with the material that scholars already had on their
                        computers. Despite the range of national and temporal orientations, every
                        research scholar I knew worked with pdfs, which had recently become the
                        standard digitized format for journal articles and scanned books. A single
                        application would accept pdf’s and churn out a text version of the article
                        (presumably with the noise of headers, footers, and page numbers intact).
                        Despite the noise, the information encoded in the text would be sufficient
                        for us to design the application so that it could generalize about
                        collections of pdf’s, for instance creating word clouds that suggested the
                        transition of pdf’s in a single field from one decade to the next.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p31">31</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p31">
                        <a href="http://papermachines.org/" onclick="window.open('http://papermachines.org/'); return false" class="ref"><cite class="title italic">Paper Machines</cite></a> was thus designed to operate within existing infrastructure –
                        depending on the folders of pdf’s that users already had on their machines.
                        I originally imagined it as a kind of box, into which a user would drag
                        folders of documents, with the result of producing visualizations about the
                        contents of those folders. Eventually, my co-designer, Christopher
                        Johnson-Roberson, proposed a tool that would scrape text and generate
                        visualizations from inside another existing piece of humanities
                        infrastructure: <a href="https://www.zotero.org/" onclick="window.open('https://www.zotero.org/'); return false" class="ref"><cite class="title italic">Zotero</cite></a>, the application that many humanists use to organize their citations
                        for books, articles, and archival materials. Inside <cite class="title italic">Zotero</cite>, <cite class="title italic">Paper Machines</cite> operated as
                        a right-click menu that offered a set of commands by which a researcher
                        could extract text from a file, or order that text to be generalized into
                        topic models, word clouds, or networks of phrases. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p32">32</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p32"> Today, a variety of humanities applications, including <a href="https://hdlab.stanford.edu/palladio/" onclick="window.open('https://hdlab.stanford.edu/palladio/'); return false" class="ref"><cite class="title italic">Palladio</cite></a> and <a href="https://www.cortext.net/" onclick="window.open('https://www.cortext.net/'); return false" class="ref"><cite class="title italic">Cortext</cite></a> allow users to upload their own data, typically accepting files in
                        the form of text or Excel document. Tools like <a href="https://voyant-tools.org/" onclick="window.open('https://voyant-tools.org/'); return false" class="ref"><cite class="title italic">Voyant</cite></a> and <a href="https://www.hypershelf.org/" onclick="window.open('https://www.hypershelf.org/'); return false" class="ref"><cite class="title italic">InPho Topic Explorer</cite></a> allow scholars to cut-and-paste raw text from any source. PhiloLogic
                        works with any TEI-encoded text sent directly to its editors for uploading.
                        Portals of this kind offer an invaluable resource for scholars with little
                        technical background who wish to take advantage of existing digital tools to
                        analyze text in a given form.
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">The Principle of Neutrality with Respect to Technical Literacy.</h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p33">33</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p33">Consider sociologist Matthew Desmond’s website, <a href="http://evictionlab.org/" onclick="window.open('http://evictionlab.org/'); return false" class="ref">Eviction Lab</a>, which currently
                        serves data on local eviction rates to members of the public, directly
                        feeding local housing campaigns, but also providing a solid stream of data
                        to journalists and legislators via the site’s API. Desmond’s web portal is
                        “friendly”, we might say, in the sense of serving data within a
                        sparsely-designed interface, set to a map of the United States; users can
                        zoom into any locality, and explore rates of eviction and demographics for
                        that site, as well as comparing one site to others. The portal delivers
                        information; the cleaner the interface, the easier to use, and the more
                        attention the portal attracts. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p34">34</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p34">
                        “Friendliness” is thus a function of obscurity, in a sense: more
                        accessible than a monograph or scholarly journal, the portal obscures
                        expertise; there are no footnotes or citations and few allusions to other
                        organizations. One dimension of this friendliness is the obscuring of other
                        forms of infrastructure – the many organizations whose work contributed to
                        the gathering of the data; the many organizations at work, some of which
                        initially complained at a lack of acknowledgement from Eviction Lab [<a class="ref" href="#aiello2018">Aiello et al. 2018</a>]. Indeed, as we have seen, one function of
                        infrastructure is frequently its invisibility: the cables that carry data
                        across the ocean are submerged; users of libraries rarely consider the labor
                        and investments that created those institutions. Yet obscurity is not the
                        only function of friendly design; rather, a clean and legible design also
                        serves the function of inviting participation.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p35">35</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p35"> Friendly design tempts users to investigate a dataset or tool according to
                        their own peculiar motivations, which have only been anticipated by the
                        interface’s designer in a general way. Indeed, one aspect of the
                        accessibility of web portals is to obscure many of the acts of accreditation
                        and comparison that are typical of journal footnotes and published
                        monographs, explaining the conclusions that a scholar came to on the basis
                        of data. Instead, in Eviction Lab, the user is invited to make their own
                        comparisons between any two geographical entities, examining rates of
                        eviction, poverty and race between a given city and the rest of the state
                        where it is located. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p36">36</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p36"> Another dimension of the seeming accessibility of the data is thus that the
                        uses presented to the public are potentially open-ended: the scholar who
                        shares data about rent, city-by-city, cannot know the political ends to
                        which arguments about that data will be put. Data about rents is interpreted
                        in one way by advocates of the free market and another way by advocates of
                        welfare services; but without facts to argue about, the discussion is won
                        merely by the fact of identification with an ideology, and thus by
                        authority, rather than discourse, debate, and reason. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p37">37</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p37"> Faith in the <em class="emph">process</em> of such a discourse to produce
                        understanding, particularly when all players have access to original texts,
                        is part of the legacy of the enlightenment. Indeed, encouraging contemporary
                        people to engage the shared reality of the past – to interpret it and come
                        to understanding on their own, to begin to understand the present in
                        relationship to shared historical experience, however naively at first – is
                        surely part of the core duty of scholars and universities. Builders can
                        limit the extent to which users of topic models or other abstractions can
                        away from historical truth by linking visualizations back to the original
                        text – a strategy we discussed in the Principle of Transparency – such that
                        a debate on social media might occur that took the form of a series of
                        refutations grounded in precise arguments about what to make of particular
                        passages of texts. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p38">38</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p38"> In the humanities, it is possible that certain scholars experience an
                        aversion to the principle of sharing learned documents beyond the sacrosanct
                        borders of those initiated into the elite habits of hermeneutics and
                        historiography. An anecdote shared by one scholar/builder suggests that a
                        grant to release a public topic model of Jefferson’s correspondence was
                        crushed, at one point, by a reviewer who feared that political forces in the
                        public would demonize Jefferson on account of topics that referred to
                        slaves. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p39">39</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p39"> Sharing the tools of abstracting and contextualizing arguments in their
                        original context is surely part of the process of helping the public to
                        perceive the past as accessible and a source of reason or rational debate to
                        begin with: it is tools that can be argued about, linked to original
                        passages of text, that can prove to naïve readers that the past is something
                        about which rational arguments can be had, where arguments about the past
                        have to be backed up by reasonable citations of an authoritative text
                        stream. Engaging the tools doesn’t relinquish the battle over
                        interpretation; rather, it moves the battle of interpretation out of the
                        arcane world of footnotes, into a world of (preferably transparent) graphs
                        and passages of text that any literate person can begin to understand. I
                        shall return to this question of how tools help contemporary societies to
                        establish a shared understanding of their past and present in the discussion
                        of a later section, the Principle of Creating Knowledge About the Social
                        World. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p40">40</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p40"> Today, portals such as <cite class="title italic">Philologic</cite>, <cite class="title italic">Topic Explorer</cite>, <cite class="title italic">Voyant</cite> and <cite class="title italic">Palladio</cite> make readily
                        available a graphic user interface for documents brought in by the user,
                        wrought out of precious seasons of user-testing the redesign, with the
                        purpose of delivering a tool easy to use to those with no training.
                        Single-archive portals such as the <cite class="title italic">Old Bailey</cite>
                        offer multiple transformations so that a user can explore the history of
                        court cases by gender, crime, name, and other archive-supplied variables.
                        All of these tools aim on bringing the facility and nimbleness of code to a
                        base of users whose priority is research, rather than mastery of the
                        architecture of coding.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p41">41</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p41"> In 2010-2, I worked on a similar piece of infrastructure – <cite class="title italic">Paper Machines</cite> – which could be embedded within
                        the existing Zotero portal for storing documents, allowing users to generate
                        word clouds and other visualizations for the pdf’s organized on their
                        computer. Our starting assumptions with <cite class="title italic">Paper
                           Machines</cite> departed from a moment when most scholars in the
                        humanities lacked the technical expertise to convert files from pdf to clean
                        text. We anticipated that scholars would want to harness the tools of
                        aggregating information across thousands of the pdf’s that each of us
                        already had on our desktops, and that Google Books had just made available
                        in enormous numbers. In order to accomplish this, scholars would need access
                        to highly interoperable tools. By the nature of the community in which I was
                        embedded, any tool I worked on necessarily needed to bring insights to a
                        plurality of scholars who worked on a range of topics, periods, languages
                        and nations, who possessed a range of technical proficiencies from ample to
                        extremely limited. Such an imagined user base underscored the importance of
                        working with existing infrastructure, of transparency and usability as
                        values. The idea is to present a low bar of technical literacy with the end
                        of enabling all users – regardless of their background – to replicate a
                        scholarly analysis, or to run their own. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p42">42</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p42"> In the case of our work, it was vital that <cite class="title italic">Paper
                           Machines</cite> serve the largest number of users with the smallest
                        technological interventions to produce an easy transformation of the data
                        into visual form, organized so as to be as convenient as possible to
                        novices. It was intended to be facile and transparent, easily installed and
                        easily opened. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p43">43</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p43"> Extended beyond <cite class="title italic">Paper Machines</cite>, this principle
                        raises questions about the design of library and museum catalogues, national
                        newspaper collections and archives of political debates, and indeed any
                        collection of archives whose user base includes a general public which may
                        not be literate. If the institution wishes to justify itself to a public
                        taxpayer-base, to create transparency about national history or the nature
                        of its political system, then builders of humanities infrastructure must
                        follow the precepts of user interface design to enable the movement from
                        question to analysis through a transparent, largely visual interface. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p44">44</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p44"> Indeed, the barriers to technological literacy may be more vast than the
                        infrastructure itself. As Miriam Posner has argued, barriers may be
                        institutional and cultural rather than defined by software. Successful
                        digital humanities centers typically require a great deal of independence
                        from university administration — as well as support — in order to provision
                        researchers with the tools of committed research [<a class="ref" href="#posner2013">Posner 2013</a>].
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">The Principle of the Primacy of Pattern Recognition. </h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p45">45</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p45">Today, the designers of algorithms can borrow from an immense assortment of
                        possible clustering algorithms from Machine Learning and statistics. It is
                        not clear, in all cases, how the transformation of language encoded in these
                        processes are applicable to humanities concerns. Put simply, pattern
                        recognition is the coin of the realm of the humanities and social sciences,
                        structuring insights from linguistics, history, archaeology, sociology, and
                        political science, since at least the age of Ernst Cassirer. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p46">46</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p46"> In the design of Paper Machines, algorithms were chosen that would
                        foreground pattern recognition and make available insights to which scholars
                        could give their assent – on the basis of relatively easy-to-explain
                        insights from computer science. My graduate school education coincided with
                        the linguistic turn in British history, and my first point of orientation to
                        the digital humanities was the possibility of measuring language as an index
                        of political change. Another basic orientation was that we would foreground
                        forms of analysis that already replicated, insofar as possible, the sorting
                        and pattern-recognition functions of ordinary scholars of cultural, social,
                        or political language. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p47">47</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p47"> Establishing and foregrounding the patterns being measured in a text has a
                        clear benefit: it underscores examples of human behavior that other
                        observers can easily recognize, grounded in facts that can be shown to
                        correlate with the analysis. For this reason, pattern recognition is the
                        gold standard of analysis in the humanities and social sciences. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p48">48</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p48"> For this reason, likewise, drawing attention to cultural patterns has
                        transformative potential because it directly relates analysis to fact.
                        Inspired by the overwhelming power of cultural criticism based in patterns,
                        digital humanities students at Berkeley addressed the #blacklivesmatter
                        movement by creating an Online Hate Index (OHI) that would recognize
                        patterns in twitter and social media [<a class="ref" href="#vacano2017">Vacano et al. 2017</a>]. Such a
                        tool, in theory, has transformative political potential as much as any
                        Frankfurt School analysis of culture, on the same principle: that
                        enlightenment can be tagged to self-conscious reflexivity about cultural
                        phenomena, and that awakening, therefore, can be harnessed to the
                        recognition and analysis of patterns. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p49">49</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p49"> Not every online archive necessarily helps readers to navigate by using
                        visualizations that foreground repeated patterns in the text. Earlier
                        schools of infrastructure design – for example, many hyperlinked scholarly
                        editions, web-born exhibits of art history, and keyword-searchable web
                        repositories too numerous to mention – simply delivered text or
                        visualizations to the user, one list or item at a time.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p50">50</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p50"> The skills of rendering insights from repeated patterns are associated with
                        the school of Cultural Analytics, especially publications in the <cite class="title italic">Journal of Cultural Analytics</cite>, which has begun, in
                        recent years, to harvest the most successful examples of pattern-recognition
                        aided by advances in statistics and machine learning [<a class="ref" href="#bamman2014">Bamman et al. 2014</a>]
                        <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#piper2019">#piper2019</a></span>
                        <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#lansdall2017">#lansdall2017</a></span>
                        [<a class="ref" href="#so2019">So et al. 2019</a>]
                        [<a class="ref" href="#underwood2018">Underwood et al. 2018</a>]. The natural next expression of the methods
                        laid out in these journal articles – which count, for example, named
                        subjects by gender and race, or identify words associated with gender and
                        race, or cluster documents temporally – is for those toolsets to be made
                        usable by the public through the design of portals that would harness the
                        full capability of our present knowledge of pattern-recognition. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p51">51</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p51"> To foreground the tools that draw attention to patterns based on repeated
                        use of words – from basic keyword-counting to named entity extraction to
                        topic modeling – reduces the technological intervention to something
                        grounded in theories familiar to scholars of language such as Wittgenstein,
                        Cassirer, Laswell, Austin, Skinner, Koselleck, and their heirs. A
                        pattern-recognition toolkit is relatively transparent to users with respect
                        to its possible uses and implications. At the same time, insisting on the
                        primacy of pattern recognition must not come into conflict with the reality
                        of the plural desires of humanists. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p52">52</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p52"> For those insights to be useable, and to garner consent, it is not enough
                        that the types of analysis used be composed of concepts familiar to
                        humanists and social scientists; they must also be replicable.
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">The Principle of Replicability.</h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p53">53</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p53">A concept introduced in another article in this issue, the “pipeline”
                        promise that the results of working with any given text base can be
                        generalized. A term borrowed from computer science, the pipeline suggests a
                        structure that enables the transformation of data through particular
                        modules, each of which is completed before the next takes over.
                        Conceptually, describing the way that a particular data visualization was
                        produced through a pipeline underscores the need to transparently document
                        the choices that comprise any particular approach to data. Sharing a
                        pipeline, in the form of open data or open-source code, means being fully
                        transparent about how a scholar arrived at a particular conclusion. Sharing
                        pipelines also opens the gates to constructive scholarly critique, for
                        instance, inviting other scholars to run the same code on the same data, but
                        with a different cleaning algorithm or clustering equation, to see how
                        different the results might be.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p54">54</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p54"> Scholarly journals in the humanities have begun to make this kind of sharing
                        possible by adopting relationships with existing infrastructure that
                        supports the sharing of code and data alongside shared ideas and
                        visualizations. For instance, the <cite class="title italic">Journal of Cultural
                           Analytics</cite> asks authors to contribute their data and code to the
                        Harvard Dataverse, an existing open-source infrastructure that allows a user
                        to share and label datasets and code so that they are transparent and
                        findable. The <cite class="title italic">Hansard Topic Relevance
                           Identifier</cite>, <cite class="title italic">HaToRI</cite>, discussed in
                        another essay in the same issue of <cite class="title italic">Digital Humanities
                           Quarterly</cite> – aspires to the “pipeline” concept documented
                        here, where every choice in the production of an analysis is documented, and
                        any choice can be questioned, with the result of producing different
                        material. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p55">55</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p55"> Sharing pipelines encourages inter-disciplinary, inter-temporal, and
                        inter-national replication of results, comparison, and extrapolation. A
                        pipeline designed around the Hansard debates for Great Britain can be
                        plugged into the EU debates, the debates of the American congress or NYC
                        council, with the same transformations executed on the same infrastructure. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p56">56</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p56"> Building infrastructure in this way makes good on the promise typically
                        ascribed to <em class="term">critical theory</em> in the humanities and social
                        sciences since the era of Hegel and Marx, where comparisons of social
                        phenomena from diverse places and times can be rendered understandable and
                        compared in aggregate. Infrastructure designed to work only with a single
                        group of texts does not do this, but infrastructure that is interoperable
                        with a great range of material in theory allows vast comparisons and
                        contrasts that will enable the next generation of social theorists,
                        theorists of literature, and theorists of society to draw the
                        generalizations that will structure our knowledge of the world. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p57">57</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p57">Eve Kraicer, Andrew Piper and other scholars are pursuing an intellectual
                        agenda in the design of code pipelines that make possible the critical
                        reading of gender, class, and race in large-scale bodies of texts <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#kraicer2019">#kraicer2019</a></span>. Their work differs from traditional endeavors,
                        of course, in that it is replicable – that is, the body of code that Kraicer
                        and Piper apply to American best-selling novels since the 1970s can, with
                        the adjustment of perhaps five lines of code, be applied to Victorian novels
                        or Renaissance broadsides, assuming clean data has already been prepared. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p58">58</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p58">Potential replicability is underscored where scholars share actual code – or
                        create a web portal that allows a body of code to be applied texts supplied
                        by the scholar. A scholarly body of code, such as historian Lincoln Mullen’s
                        “textreuse”, a toolset for comparing large bodies of text, opens
                        doors for further scholarship, thus matching in significance works of
                        critical theory, potentially rendering Mullen a contemporary Bourdieu. In
                        <cite class="title italic">InPho Topic Explorer</cite>, philosopher Colin
                        Allen provides an interface where scholars can submit any body of text to
                        topic modeling, thus allowing humanists and social scientists access to a
                        preferred tool for the machine-enabled clustering of documents. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p59">59</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p59">This potential replicability of a theory across data-sets represents the
                        fulfillment of the universalizing principles of the humanities since Vico,
                        that is, the desire to make sense of multiple times and places. At the same
                        time, the critical theory impulses of Piper and his cohort also have crafted
                        forms of code (such as vector analysis of gender-index words) that enable
                        scholars to lift nuanced semantic differences from very diverse bodies of
                        text. In other words, the skilled reader, addressing this material, should
                        be able, with the help of critical infrastructure, to preserve and describe
                        cultural nuances that differentiate one moment from another, peering with
                        ever finer attention into the characteristics and tensions within a
                        corpus.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p60">60</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p60">I am not saying, of course, that different cultures will not require
                        different infrastructures or different kinds of code. Scholars of Chinese
                        history, for example, reaffirm that many forms of digital humanities
                        pipelines developed for western texts – which, for instance, depend upon
                        word order for grammatical understanding – would be misapplied to their
                        field, even while forms of analysis that jettison word order – including
                        semantic network analysis and topic modeling – appear to work fine. The
                        promise of infrastructure to extend and replicate scholarly inquiry is
                        clear; the limits of that promise need still to be worked out through many
                        case studies and much experimentation. 
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">The Principle of Creating Knowledge About the Social World. </h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p61">61</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p61">An implied extension of a transparent document base is that documents are a
                        reflection of a shared historical context that has a reality and permanence,
                        even within opposing interpretations: Jefferson’s contemporaries might have
                        argued about the tolerability of human slavery, but none would have
                        contested that slavery was a contemporary reality of deep and persistent
                        concern, structuring their economic and social world to a deep degree. A
                        piece of infrastructure can be – in certain circumstances – a tool for
                        generating assent. Through encouraging consensus around some insight into
                        social or economic reality, pattern recognition can offer the basis for
                        collective action. More than simply advising a critical point of view,
                        infrastructure can provision citizens and movements with data that actually
                        then becomes part of their work. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p62">62</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p62"> It is clear that the humanities and social sciences have a great deal to
                        offer, on an interpretive level, to the public, beyond merely being
                        purveyors of data. Philosophers and feminists from Hannah Arendt to Seyla
                        Benhabib have long valorized the role of the humanities and social sciences
                        in the public sphere, in particular citing its capacity to enliven critical
                        thinking about contemporary discourses of politics and identity. Working in
                        this tradition, many scholars are used to understanding “critique” and
                        “complication” as aligned with a political critique of empire,
                        politics, and exclusion. More recently, Rita Felski has argued that critique
                        reaches its limit when the hermeneutics of suspicion is turned everywhere
                        <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#felski2015">#felski2015</a></span>, and has urged scholars to remember their
                        value as curators of memory, critics of politics, and composers of stories
                        <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#mullins2015">#mullins2015</a></span>. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p63">63</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p63">Inviting the public to inspect data for itself is an action that implies
                        political consequences. Consider the political context that motivated
                        historians David Eltis and Catherine Hall – both historians of slavery —
                        have turned into builders of infrastructure, in the midst of British debates
                        about remunerations for slavery. Such projects as these represent broadly
                        the fact that scholars are using infrastructures for serving cultural and
                        political artifacts to the public as a way of engaging, instructing, and
                        facilitating further cycles of engagement by the public. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p64">64</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p64">Their projects have granted the public access not only to a curated debates
                        about the history of slavery, but also directly to massive troves of
                        quantitative, spatial and economic data about the British slave trade (<a href="https://www.slavevoyages.org/" onclick="window.open('https://www.slavevoyages.org/'); return false" class="ref">Slave Voyages</a>, <a href="http://www.ucl.ac.uk/lbs" onclick="window.open('http://www.ucl.ac.uk/lbs'); return false" class="ref">The Legacies of British
                           Slavery</a>). Of the two projects, it is Hall’s – the “Legacies of British Slavery” – that has perhaps most directly
                        sought to create an epistemic bridge to contemporary discourse, insofar as
                        they profile the continuing profits that Europeans have reaped as a result
                        of legacies of the past. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p65">65</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p65">Both portals did three things that critical essays cannot do: (1) They
                        reduced the arguments over Britain’s involvement in the slave trade down to
                        a single visualization. (2) Indirectly, they invited the public to view the
                        data upon which the visualization was based for themselves, offering it in
                        the agnostic guise of “raw data” rather than as a series of footnotes
                        compiled by an expert in the service of a project. We might, of course, take
                        issue with “raw data” in principle, agreeing with Johanna Drucker that
                        all data is already cooked: but the public fascination with raw data
                        remains. And both scholars implicitly took advantage of the public
                        fascination with raw data to demonstrate, in their portals, the extent of
                        data upon which their visualizations rest. (3) They made the data
                        interoperable, allowing the public to test conclusions for themselves. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p66">66</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p66">At the same time, other scholars reviewing those projects might raise
                        questions about whether all examples are equally “critical” in the
                        sense of how profound is the new perspective it offers on the past. A
                        scholarly edition represents a critical intervention in Literary Studies and
                        is celebrated when evidence is mustered to persuade readers of a
                        dramatically new interpretation of a canonical text. Digital editions, like
                        <a href="https://www.frankenbook.org/" onclick="window.open('https://www.frankenbook.org/'); return false" class="ref"><cite class="title italic">Frankenbook</cite></a>, the most recent digital edition of <cite class="title italic">Frankenstein</cite> – an exemplars of the genre, built on several
                        generations of digital edition work — would have to pass this test of
                        “critical” interventions in order to attract the notice of some
                        departments. Clearer examples of critical interventions where humanities and
                        social sciences knowledge is used to create a radical break with present-day
                        narratives of politics and identity include <a href="http://xpmethod.plaintext.in/torn-apart/volume/2/index" onclick="window.open('http://xpmethod.plaintext.in/torn-apart/volume/2/index'); return false" class="ref"><cite class="title italic">Torn Apart/Separados</cite></a>, which documents child separations at detainment centers along the
                        national border, providing users with data, visualizations, and a critical
                        narrative. At the same time, <cite class="title italic">Torn Apart</cite> ejects
                        a critical humanistic perspective into materials in the public sphere. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p67">67</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p67"> In sociologist Matthew Desmond’s ethnography, <cite class="title italic">Evicted
                           </cite>, Desmond provides accounts of families in Milwaukee who faced
                        eviction, and the resulting stress to savings, education, children, health,
                        and jobs that resulted from their experience. In Desmond’s companion
                        website, <cite class="title italic">Eviction Lab</cite>, he provides users across
                        the United States with information about the rate of homelessness and
                        eviction in their neighborhoods. The infrastructure offers insight into the
                        local realities of neighborhoods outside the Rust Belt. Another companion
                        website, <a href="https://justshelter.org/" onclick="window.open('https://justshelter.org/'); return false" class="ref"><cite class="title italic">JustShelter</cite></a>, offers corridors to action by connecting users with organizations
                        that advocate for housing rights. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p68">68</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p68">Like Desmond’s <cite class="title italic">Eviction Lab</cite>, <cite class="title italic">Torn Apart</cite> offers the public an open-source
                        databank that renders visible previously invisible patterns of expenditure
                        and violence. <cite class="title italic">Torn Apart</cite> thus creates a
                        scholarly intervention in a realm that was previously little addressed by
                        scholars, or if addressed, in such a partial way as to make less of an
                        intervention than <cite class="title italic">Torn Apart’s</cite> open-source
                        databank. Rendering visible the invisible, and making accessible the
                        previously inaccessible data of knowledge, such infrastructures as these
                        attempt interventions that differ in content, scale, and power from other
                        scholarly productions, and they are therefore deserving of special attention
                        as models of criticality and engagement with the public sphere.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p69">69</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p69">The social power of documents to create an informed consensus becomes evident
                        in digital humanities portals that illuminate politically contested episodes
                        of national history. In portals such as <cite class="title italic">Slave
                           Voyages</cite> and the <cite class="title italic">Legacies of British Slavery
                           </cite>site, historians of Britain have published, for the benefit of a
                        wide public, the primary records and quantitative distillation of the
                        history of persons enslaved by the modern west. The portals, by their
                        design, offer members of the public, as well as other scholars, access to
                        primary-source artifacts, original numbers, visualizations and maps, as well
                        as critical interpretations that, for instance in the case of the Legacies
                        project, link the historical record to present-day companies and families
                        whose wealth was bound up with the trade. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p70">70</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p70">In such a circumstance, where the material governed by a site is potentially
                        political, the designers of infrastructure have an opportunity to thwart the
                        logic of naysayerdom in the era of fake news by firmly circulating
                        primary-source evidence to users. By providing direct links to the primary
                        source material on which the analysis is based, the <cite class="title italic">Legacies</cite> site all the more firmly asserts the possibility of a
                        new consensus around the history of British slavery and its
                        repercussions.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p71">71</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p71">Perhaps a more important aspect of scholarly infrastructure as argument
                        functions in the realm of a critical understanding of the potential
                        audiences and points of access to scholarly data. In the age of peer-to-peer
                        networking with humanities and social science data, new collaborations are
                        possible that never could have been accomplished in the age of individual
                        research in the archive, and many journalistic theories have sought to
                        characterize the generative potential of “hive mind” or many-to-many
                        learning (Shirky). More recent research, however, has emphasized that
                        many-to-many discursive spaces online create echo chambers that can be
                        deleterious to learning, feedback, or critical thinking (Nguyen).
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p72">72</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p72">Information flows of any kind may generate echo chambers. Social theory
                        foregrounds the potential of any flow of information to either intensify
                        power or undercut it. It suggests that the choices made in the construction
                        of institutions and infrastructure determine whether the experience of
                        information will create a cult-like experience of information – where
                        outside information is met with suspicion – or whether new information,
                        data, and expertise will be experienced as the essence of liberation. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p73">73</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p73"> It might appear, of course, that a principle that demands consensus about
                        reality is one of top-down power exerted over the user base by the
                        designers. Indeed, the principle of creating knowledge about the social
                        world operates in tension with another principle: that of a plurality of
                        humanistic desires. 
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">The Principle of a Plurality of Humanistic Desires. </h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p74">74</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p74">Yet another orientation was to imagine our potential users as a plural
                        community with a diversity of desires and perspectives with regard to
                        electronic archives. In designing <cite class="title italic">Paper
                           Machines</cite> for an imagined diverse public of my fellow
                        researchers, I had no ambition of creating a specific tool that would
                        “understand” documents; rather I would leave it to users to
                        organize their documents into relevant categories – for example, comparing
                        decades, authors, subject-matter, or genres of writing. Instead, the tool
                        would only implement algorithms that would prosthetically “extend” the
                        ordinary capabilities of scholars: generalizing about large bodies of text,
                        enabling the researcher to develop new insights into the material. By
                        designing an infrastructure with fairly humble goals, we would offer the
                        services of these algorithms to researchers who had little time away from
                        the archive to code. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p75">75</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p75"> This principle holds more instruction for institutions such as libraries,
                        museums, and national archives that have a particular responsibility to a
                        non-scholarly user base. If the infrastructure is supposed to serve the
                        general public, it must be accessible and transparent to a general public,
                        whose desires from the archive may be genealogical or political in a narrow
                        sense, rather than a reflection of current scholarship. The tools at hand
                        should enable the finding of more documents according to a plurality of
                        desires. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p76">76</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p76"> Indeed, Joris van Zundert has lately underscored the limits of humanities
                        infrastructure projects tailored to a single archive – and the need of tools
                        to help scholars who deal with heterogenous data <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#vanzundert2012">#vanzundert2012</a></span>. The desire principle, in theory, would
                        facilitate not only collective research programs but also individual
                        trajectories of research within those archives – and across multiple
                        archives. Zotero allows a user to collect documents from multiple databases,
                        for instance gathering trials from the Old Bailey and books from Hathi Trust
                        alongside pamphlets help on JSTOR. By working within Zotero, <cite class="title italic">Paper Machines </cite> made room for such erratic
                        document-gathering habits, and attempted to offer tools that would allow the
                        researcher to generalize about the collection as a whole. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p77">77</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p77"> Once a scholar who used Zotero had collected her own archive, <cite class="title italic">Paper Machines</cite> was designed to facilitate
                        individual exploration and experimentation with as broad an array of tools
                        as possible. By trying on different categories, researchers could summon
                        algorithms to quantitatively interpret texts, in much the same way as
                        researchers’ own imagination typically sorts texts into different categories
                        by decade, genre, and theme. The researcher would thus be able to
                        <em class="emph">test</em> her subjective assessment of different categories
                        using the quantitative power of a tool. Quantitative testing, we assumed,
                        might reveal the user’s subjective categories to be grounded in fact.
                        Alternatively, it might destabilize the user’s categories and suggest other
                        patterns, established by regular word order, that might complement or
                        challenge the user’s assessments. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p78">78</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p78"> Through these operations, researchers could iteratively model sub-portions
                        of a corpus. They could view a body of texts as if through different lenses,
                        reorganizing the corpus into different subcategories, and comparing the
                        perspective raised by these subcategories, for instance rapidly glancing at
                        the perspective of the corpus organized by decades and that of the corpus
                        organized by genres or themes. Similar design principles governed the
                        University of Virginia’s <cite class="title italic">Collex </cite>, designed to
                        facilitate the collection and exhibition of a suite of documents gathered by
                        a researcher according to his or her own research program; they continue to
                        inform the design principles behind <cite class="title italic">Omeka</cite>, the
                        go-to resource for narrating a public story grounded in well-annotated
                        archival artifacts. Both tools allowed scholars to extrapolate their own
                        language for analyzing cultural documents, providing basic annotations like
                        maps or timelines to enhance the user’s capabilities of storytelling.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p79">79</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p79">
                        <cite class="title italic">Paper Machines </cite>and other analogues like <cite class="title italic">Voyant</cite> and <cite class="title italic">Cortext</cite>
                        enhanced individual story-telling with the possibility of data analysis.
                        They provide researchers with a to test different quantitative perspectives
                        on the corpus, rapidly switching between the perspective enabled by two
                        different mathematical models, for example word count and topic model. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p80">80</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p80"> Yet <cite class="title italic">Paper Machines</cite> added one facet that the
                        others lacked: because it was built in Zotero – a platform that allowed
                        scholars to share collections of documents with each other – <cite class="title italic">Paper Machines </cite> facilitated research on shared
                        archives, where a group of scholars might agree about a subset of documents
                        of interest, and then embark on different algorithmic approaches to
                        understanding those documents. This zone of inquiry would take place between
                        individual research on mass shared collections and individual research on
                        individual collections, occupying what Paul Edwards might dub the
                        “intermediary scale” of research infrastructure. It would make room
                        for shared, sociable research desires to emerge – not merely on an
                        individual or collective scale – but also within the space of
                        micro-communities. 
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">The Critical Principles of Scholarly Infrastructure </h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p81">81</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p81"> Thus far, the principles have focused on the relationship between a
                        non-technical user base and a technical process of transformation, although
                        embracing the principles has, as has been shown, implications for the power
                        of the digital humanities to redound onto critical theory and seed
                        interventions across the disciplines. Another set of principles govern the
                        relationship between users and the erudite nature of archives themselves;
                        these principles are best understood within a review of writings about power
                        dynamics and infrastructure. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p82">82</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p82"> The implicit power dynamics involved with supporting digital infrastructure
                        within the university itself have been subject to inspection and critique
                        for at least two decades. After all, as critics of modern technologies of
                        communication have long understood, power is at work at each scale in an
                        infrastructure system. As many scholars in what is now called “critical infrastructure studies” have shown, at
                        each scale and within each part of the pipeline, choices in values can
                        change what is implemented <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#cicollective2018">#cicollective2018</a></span>). On a national
                        scale, highway systems, water systems, and other infrastructure are designed
                        with the desire with potential interest groups in mind: for example, water
                        policy in early twentieth-century California shored up the advantages of
                        large landholders by giving them privileged access to irrigation (Worster),
                        while the design of eighteenth-century road networks in Britain and
                        nineteenth-century land redistribution programs in America was designed to
                        give economic access to small farmers and workers (Worster, Guldi, Foner). A
                        choice of values – which either reinforce existing power dynamics or
                        counteract them — is thus at work in the design of infrastructure at every
                        level of scale. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p83">83</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p83">Digital infrastructures play into the same dynamics: they redound power
                        dynamics of rich and poor nations and rich and poor communities, experts and
                        non-experts, by reinforcing existing differentials of access. On a global
                        scale, internet infrastructure is effected by choices about internet
                        providers, such as networks of physical cables that connect rich countries
                        to the exclusion of the poor translate realpolitik into technology <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#starosielski2015">#starosielski2015</a></span>. On the geographical scale of each
                        community, smart phones and GPS usage require some levels of literacy and
                        other forms of expertise in order to be useful <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#sawyer2019">#sawyer2019</a></span>.
                        What’s more, the choice to maintain or not to maintain structures the
                        accessibility of infrastructure and its benefits <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#mattern2018">#mattern2018</a></span>
                        [<a class="ref" href="#graham2007">Graham and Thrift 2007</a>]
                        [<a class="ref" href="#henke1999">Henke 1999</a>]: as when local maintenance of water facilities,
                        delayed in Michigan, results in working-class populations being poisoned, or
                        when differential maintenance across Parisian neighborhoods results in a
                        seamless experience for an elite minority and a degraded experience for the
                        rest [<a class="ref" href="#denis2014">Denis and Pontille 2014</a>]. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p84">84</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p84">In creating digital infrastructures, the builders of web portals have
                        opportunities to counteract these power differentials. Builders who favor
                        the strategies of “minimal computing” put their
                        websites within reach of citizens in the global south or poor neighborhoods
                        who frequently must access the internet through second-rate connections [<a class="ref" href="#godh2018">GO::DH 2018</a>].
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p85">85</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p85">Other builders of infrastructure have primarily conceived of themselves as
                        designing the tools for the coming of another community beyond the
                        imagination of the designers. For example, the activists who designed
                        toolkits for participatory mapping in the 1970s and 1980s imagined that the
                        toolsets they wove together would be used by communities for purposes beyond
                        what the original activists could imagine: and indeed, put into action, the
                        participatory maps came to be used for the purposes of monitoring pollution,
                        redistributing land, and protecting indigenous property rights (Guldi). Just
                        so, the historical function of Britain’s nineteenth-century road network
                        cannot be entirely understood through the work of engineers, but only
                        through the use of the network made by the road’s users – including
                        Methodists, journeymen, and radicals – who used the roads to create
                        communities sometimes antithetical to the capitalist and nation-building
                        purposes imagined by the network’s designers <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#guldi2012">#guldi2012</a></span>. The
                        power of relinquishing control over infrastructure often makes the
                        infrastructure of comparatively long use and greater effectiveness overall. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p86">86</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p86">Some scholars will resist a form of scholarly practice marked by the
                        relinquishing of control. They may argue that the value of traditional
                        scholarship reflects the scholar’s command of language, citation, and
                        transparency of sources to elucidate what facts have been used and what
                        argument is being made. Indeed, many scholarly infrastructure project
                        support direct control over the transmission of bibliographic information.
                        While a web-born scholarly edition of Mary Shelley’s <cite class="title italic">Frankenstein</cite>, for example, may offer a useful resource to the
                        teachers of Victorian literature grounded in printed and manuscript
                        archives, the web-born format almost entirely replicates the form of
                        traditional scholarly editions – something entirely useful for the purposes
                        of tenure and promotion. Similarly, carefully-annotated digital collections
                        of historical documents such as <cite class="title italic">Vistas: Visual Culture
                           in Spanish America, 1520–1820</cite> (<a href="https://vistas.ace.fordham.edu/" onclick="window.open('https://vistas.ace.fordham.edu/'); return false" class="ref">https://vistas.ace.fordham.edu/</a>) represent the equivalent labor
                        of an art history exhibition or heavily-researched book. In format, these
                        tools differ very little from traditional scholarly publications in books,
                        excepting the use of hyperlinks and the scale of their accessibility.
                        Scholarly infrastructure with a traditional form may nevertheless be radical
                        in terms of its content; both the edition of <cite class="title italic">Frankenstein</cite> and <cite class="title italic">Vistas</cite> open up
                        important questions about gender and race. Not all authors of scholarly
                        infrastructure make the relinquishing of control over their sources or the
                        sources’ interpretation a feature of their design. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p87">87</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p87">Projects that emphasize the “critical” use of infrastructure make at
                        least some gesture towards the relinquishing of control, pointing towards
                        the wider uses of the community. As such, they overlap with the final
                        instance of the humanistic principles, the “principle of
                        a multiplicity of humanistic desires.” Infrastructure of this
                        kind resonates with participatory traditions in urban planning, where
                        planners consult the local community about the best course of development in
                        a particular neighborhood <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#friedmann1973">#friedmann1973</a></span> (Guldi). There are,
                        moreover, traditions of literature and philosophy where the relinquishing of
                        control is the hallmark of utility. For Roland Barthes, one of the hallmarks
                        “writerly literature” is that it can inspire
                        multiple readings and uses in cultures far from its point of origin, and so
                        “make the reader no longer a consumer but a producer
                        of the text”
                        [<a class="ref" href="#barthes1974">Barthes 1974</a>, 4]. The creation of a meaningful
                        infrastructure project is marked by the project’s ability to support the
                        user’s active production of knowledge. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p88">88</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p88">The principles outlined below investigate how scale of exposure is
                        deliberately used by certain websites to place texts of data in the public
                        realm, often marked by the relinquishing of control over the ends to which
                        the later products are put. Frequently, infrastructure projects of this sort
                        work towards the multiplication of projects well beyond those imagined or
                        intended by the designers. This article’s conclusion will strive to
                        understand what this multiplication implies for the work of scholarly
                        infrastructure.
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">The Principle that Democratization of Access to Information Breeds Better
                        Democracy.
                     </h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p89">89</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p89">The experiments with infrastructure that press the principle of neutrality
                        with respect to technical literacy to its furthest extent are those that
                        underscore mass participation, and they come to us typically from science
                        and technology studies – a discipline familiar with theories of how
                        technologies define the limits of their own participation or exclusion. In
                        Science and Technology Studies, researchers have experimented with radical
                        infrastructures that extend the principle of technical accessibility past
                        the archive and web application, into a physical infrastructure accessible
                        even to individuals whose computer and internet access is limited. In his
                        dissertation on formaldehyde in FEMA trailers, anthropologist Nicholas
                        Shapiro worked with chemists to commission post cards that would test the
                        formaldehyde content in the trailers’ walls, if occupants mailed the
                        postcard to a testing facility [<a class="ref" href="#zhang2019">Zhang et al. 2019</a>]. The paper
                        infrastructure of chemical-sensitive postcards thus made chemical testing of
                        pollution in the environment radically available to ordinary citizens,
                        allowing occupants of the trailers to test their environment for noxious
                        chemicals by themselves. Infrastructure projects such as these have pressed
                        the bar of what it means to offer information directly to the public. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p90">90</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p90">Early in the scholarly infrastructure turn, many designers of infrastructure
                        believed that delivering data and stories via the web offered an opportunity
                        to democratize access to both scholarship and primary sources. In 2008,
                        Harvard historian Robert Darnton was already making the case for open access
                        to the digitized books scanned by Google, Howard Rheingold’s article, “Participative Pedagogy: For a Literacy of
                        Literacies”, for example, argued for digital practices that
                        broadened access to “literacy”, broadly defined,
                        with the end of teaching “the ways people use knowledge
                        and technology to create wealth, secure freedom, resist tyranny”.
                        For Rheingold, this “literacy of literacy” was
                        more important than teaching the how-to of particular kinds of code or
                        technology; in essence, Rheingold was arguing that the age of the internet
                        made more necessary the proliferation of engaged and critical readings of
                        culture [<a class="ref" href="#rheingold2008">Rheingold 2008</a>].
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p91">91</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p91"> It is hard to imagine a humanities infrastructure that mirrors’ Shapiro’s
                        postcards in bringing the knowledge of the university radically to bear for
                        communities in need, but some archivists have begun to theorize the shape of
                        such a project. At the Columbia University Library, Alex Gil’s <cite class="title italic">Nimble Tents</cite> creates digitization kits to help
                        communities rebuilding after a natural disaster to map their resources <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#mcgowan2018">#mcgowan2018</a></span>. Gil has also created “The
                        Translation Toolkit”, another kit with which communities in
                        impoverished neighborhoods and the developing world can record their own
                        stories and send a copy to Columbia for preservation and translation – with
                        the idea that recordings belong ultimately to the community, and that
                        Columbia can aid communities in their analysis and documentation [<a class="ref" href="#gil2018">Gil 2018</a>].
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p92">92</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p92">The elaborate series of scholarly articles introducing students to the Old
                        Bailey archive (<a href="http://www.oldbailey.org" onclick="window.open('http://www.oldbailey.org'); return false" class="ref">http://www.oldbailey.org</a>) expose students to themes of poverty,
                        violence, gender, and race in Britain’s past. The website obviously holds
                        the same merit as (at least one) traditional textbook, if not many more, by
                        virtue of its carefully prepared archive and the many visualizations
                        thereof: the main use of this part of the website is to expand the scale of
                        potential readers who can potentially access these essays. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p93">93</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p93"> Consider <cite class="title italic">EvictionLab</cite>, which shares social
                        science data about the demographic effects of eviction policies around the
                        nation. <cite class="title italic">EvictionaLab</cite> can be seen as
                        complementary response to the social and economic critique of the harm
                        served by eviction against families of color offered by Matt Desmond’s
                        traditional scholarship, ethnographies published in the form of scholarly
                        articles. The scale of harm that Desmond uncovered in eviction was a form of
                        harm <em class="term">at scale</em>. A critique – even a powerful one – barely
                        approximates the scale of the harm that he discovered. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p94">94</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p94"> Becoming a builder of infrastructure allowed Desmond to deploy his research
                        <em class="term">at scale</em>. By creating a public portal that could answer to
                        a multiplicity of local demands for information about the local face of
                        eviction, Desmond was able to offer a level of detail that would be hard to
                        rival in a traditional book or article. In a sense, the act of building
                        allowed Desmond to enact a remedy of an appropriate scale for facing the
                        trouble that he had elsewhere critiqued. Thus while critique illuminates our
                        knowledge of harm, the limited effectiveness of critique hampers it:
                        infrastructure-building, by contrast, in the form of data portal’s like
                        Desmond’s, is a form of scholarly activity that activates a critique at
                        scale, demonstrating the relevance of an economic critique to geographical
                        locales. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p95">95</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p95"> The era of scholarly infrastructure has thus begun to forge a fundamentally
                        new idiom of scholarly communication, one where the intellectual labor of
                        critique can be married to the possibility of broad application at scale.
                        The proposed equivalence is ethical in nature: a deep harm, which scales to
                        the level of billions of families, requires a remedy that can travel further
                        than a single well-cited journal article. Deep harm requires a remedy at
                        scale: potentially, a remedy at scale also therefore requires not critique
                        alone but also data infrastructure. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p96">96</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p96">In many cases, by using scale and relinquishing control over the uses of
                        data, infrastructure invites broadcast participation in arguments over
                        social facts and public documents. In so doing, infrastructure does the work
                        that many scholarly essays, for reasons of their small audience, often
                        simply cannot do: elevating a political critique into the public sphere.
                        
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head"> The Principle of Community Ownership.</h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p97">97</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p97">In an article elsewhere, I have argued for the relevance to social science
                        and the humanities of citizen science and other movements that collect and
                        analyze data. For scholars pursuing the history of rent and eviction, for
                        instance, the labor of an individual scholar is dwarfed by the scale of
                        research imaginable if members of the public took up a scholarly charge to
                        begin collecting data about the history of rent prices, rent laws, and
                        eviction rates in every city around the world. To be sure, scholarly
                        acceptance of such a crowdsourced database would depend upon adhering to the
                        foundational principle of transparency, as well as existing standards for
                        the documentation of the <em class="term">provenance</em> of a document <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="cheney2012">cheney2012</a></span>. The payoff of building avenues towards
                        crowdsourced knowledge, however, would be an undertaking of research that
                        would dwarf contemporary undertakings in its scale and potential for
                        insight. A truly global program of insight would result. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p98">98</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p98">Critical theory has long recognized the existence of principles of democratic
                        participation against which initiatives and organizations can be measured.
                        In 1968, Sheri Arnstein’s “ladder of citizen
                        participation” arranged different forms of information sharing in
                        the public sphere on a hierarchy of democracy, ranging from
                        “manipulation” and “therapy” on one extreme to the devolution
                        of power at the most democratic. Arstein’s theory underscored the power
                        dynamics in information flows from government experts to the people, and
                        raised the possibility of new kinds of citizen-governed institutions, a move
                        that reflected current concerns of African-American populations in American
                        cities, but mirrored radical ideas about governance going back at least to
                        the era of the Paris Commune [<a class="ref" href="#guldi2017">Guldi 2017</a>]. This early theory
                        of power and democracy in political information offers a pattern for
                        understanding the radical potential of scholarly information on the
                        internet. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p99">99</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p99">Today, examples of citizen science abound, where users contribute
                        observations, insights or desires, which are exchanged over a community-run
                        infrastructure. Science and technology theorists have often critiqued the
                        first generation of citizen science for the lack of discursive engagement
                        with a program of observation laid out by experts: citizens were mobilized
                        to count birds, to cite one famous example, but not to raise critical
                        questions about how or why existing climate science had failed to be taken
                        up in American public discourse. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p100">100</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p100">There is enormous variation in whom different portals allow to play and how.
                        The <cite class="title italic">Legacies of British Slavery</cite> project makes
                        data available to users, but stops short of allowing users to shape their
                        own inquiries, holding tight to the overall interpretation of the moment in
                        what may be informed by a concern for preserving the sacrosanct authority of
                        interpretation at a time of rising ethnic nationalism. <a href="http://evictionlab.org/" onclick="window.open('http://evictionlab.org/'); return false" class="ref"><cite class="title italic">Eviction Lab</cite></a> gives away the data, allowing users to make what they will of
                        demographics and instances of families ejected from their homes. The <a href="https://github.com/dbamman/book-nlp" onclick="window.open('https://github.com/dbamman/book-nlp'); return false" class="ref"><cite class="title italic">BookNLP</cite></a> software package allows users to isolate variations in the handling
                        of gender, but lacks a public portal (as of now) that would allow a
                        tech-illiterate user to engage such an analysis. Each of these decisions
                        results from a complex of ideas about the scholar’s role, the expertise of
                        their intended audience, whether scholarly production serves purposes
                        outside the academy, and what the scholar’s relationship to that public is
                        or ought to be. Those decisions are, by nature, philosophical, political,
                        and professional; they are also subject to critical debate.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p101">101</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p101">Outside the academy, communities are transforming science into the practice
                        of citizen science by realizing Arnstein’s principle of participation and
                        community ownership. For example, the organization Public Lab hosts “Research Notes” where community members like social
                        scientist Nicholas Shapiro post requests for technical expertise – in
                        Shapiro’s case, requesting help with the technical end of formaldehyde
                        testing. In another online community, a community of small farmers called
                        <cite class="title italic">FarmHack</cite> shares blueprints for appropriate
                        technology to make small-scale farming more economically viable. But
                        experiments of this kind are less common in the digital humanities.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p102">102</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p102">Humanists who share the values of democracy would be well-advised to consider
                        whether the practice of citizen science has its place in the interpretation
                        of text: for example, whether ordinary citizens require the tools of
                        inspecting, via distant reading, the congressional or parliamentary debates
                        of their own government. 
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">The Labor of Infrastructure Building</h1>
                  
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p103">103</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p103">In the foregoing sections, I have surveyed a range of possible values expressed
                     by the builders of scholarly infrastructure. A proposition of this kind is
                     important because the intellectual engagement of infrastructure-builders with
                     critical thought has not always been self-evident to outsiders.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p104">104</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p104"> Understanding value as a factor in the kind of work embodied by scholarly
                     infrastructure projects – including the bibliographic, critical, political
                     values represented by engaging in project-building as opposed to traditional
                     scholarly documentation in the form of books and articles – is crucial to having
                     those projects accepted and interpreted as interventions in the realm of
                     scholarship, where critical commentary routinely engages the kind of
                     intellectual values represented by a project and the way that data,
                     visualizations, and other forms of labor support those values. Understanding the
                     range of possible values underlying those commitments is therefore crucial, as
                     communities and scholars come to terms with the stake of committing energy to
                     infrastructure-building rather than to traditional scholarship products such as
                     grants and articles. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p105">105</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p105">The metaphors that I have offered above – comparing scholarly infrastructure to
                     an opera house – are also productive in a number of directions that cannot be
                     exhausted in the course of this article, especially involving the question of
                     where labor or ideological contributions occur. Panning out from the opera and
                     opera-house itself, one can see any given production of <cite class="title italic">Aida</cite> is itself the product of architect, composer and librettist,
                     conductor, and cast. A reader-centric interpretation even pushes this list to
                     include the audience in the theater on any given night, and their manifold
                     interpretations of the opera <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#locke2006">#locke2006</a></span>.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p106">106</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p106">Just so, the work of digital production and interpretation includes all of those
                     forms of invisible infrastructure that include scanning and cleaning texts,
                     storing and serving them, before the design of the infrastructure; the
                     infrastructure itself, any scholarly articles whose interpretive approach
                     depends on the infrastructure in question, and any individual users of the
                     infrastructure, whether or not they later become authors of analyses published
                     in traditional academic venues. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p107">107</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p107"> The multiple locations of labor and interpretation in such a process constellate
                     a broader transition to a hermeneutic regime of information at scale. Elsewhere,
                     I have argued that shifts of this kind are marked by a deferment of “critical thinking”, where insight is produced at a
                     single point of interpretation and argumentation with the text, into a processes
                     of “critical search”, where critical engagement is
                     required over the entire length of an information pipeline <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#guldi2018">#guldi2018</a></span>. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p108">108</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p108">Appreciation for the values implicit in scholarly infrastructure has not always
                     been the tone by which digital scholarship is received by larger communities in
                     the university. In one inflammatory editorial in the <cite class="title italic">Chronicle of Higher Education</cite>, a scholar characterized the digital
                     humanities as being the tool of the neoliberal takeover of the university and an
                     ally in the adjunctification of the professoriate <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#brennan2017">#brennan2017</a></span>.
                     In at least one tenure process with which the author is familiar, a department
                     threatened to stage a kind of inquisitorial panel to monitor a digital humanist
                     already published in traditional books and articles, because engagement with
                     digital humanities and social sciences question – including building
                     infrastructure – was understood as somehow sullying the life of the mind with
                     the dirty matter of service.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e1209">[1]</a>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p109">109</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p109">The remedy for this failure is debate and conversation that theorizes what it is
                     that people do when they build infrastructure, and at what stages scholarly
                     discourse, humanistic discourse, technological acumen, dissent, and political
                     thought enter the process. Scholars who think critically about infrastructure
                     must advertise their critical engagement in the form of a scholarly essay that
                     reflects on the format of the infrastructure adopted and its implications. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p110">110</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p110"> In teasing apart the range of values represented by modern infrastructure, I
                     have argued that infrastructure building implies, at minimum, a commitment on
                     the part of the scholar to <em class="term">scale</em> and a relinquishing of
                     <em class="emph">control</em>, which imply a choice of values, including a set of
                     “traditional” values, such as transparency with regards to document
                     base and the knowledge of society, which are aligned with long-standing
                     commitments in the humanities and social sciences, and “critical” values,
                     such as participation and the critique of power, which are aligned with radical
                     traditions in the academy and beyond.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p111">111</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p111"> Recognizing the choice values at stake in building infrastructure is essential,
                     I believe, to understanding much of the work in the digital humanities and
                     social sciences as well as other parts of the university today: there is
                     something on offer that has not been illuminated in the voluminous literature on
                     infrastructure, digital humanities, or the crisis of the humanities, which
                     deserves to be recognized, praised, critiqued, and pressed, because it presents
                     a challenge to contemporary practices of scholarship, and scholarly communities
                     must decide whether that challenge is worth embracing.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head"> What is this offering, and why has it been so submerged? </h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p112">112</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p112">On the surface, infrastructure represents a different species of animal from the
                     scholarly article, whether single-authored or authored by many individuals. In
                     some cases, like Andrew Goldstone’s <a href="https://agoldst.github.io/dfr-browser/demo/" onclick="window.open('https://agoldst.github.io/dfr-browser/demo/'); return false" class="ref"><cite class="title italic">Topic Viewer</cite></a>, they are the creation of a single individual, but the individual’s
                     responsibilities include using code to who cobble together existing packages for
                     data cleaning, analysis, and visualization, as well as scholarly insight about
                     the kinds of cleaning, analysis, and visualization likely to produce insight
                     from texts of a particular type. These designs thus resemble scholarly articles
                     or narratives in that they provide users with an orientation to the data, based
                     on wide experience; but they also resemble cartography or traditional kinds of
                     data analysis in that they entail working with vast amounts of evidence to
                     produce visualizations useful to different parties for different reasons. As a
                     monument of scholarly labor and insight, the building of infrastructure
                     typically represents a major scholarly intervention – entailing more labor than
                     that included in the typical journal article in the humanities or social
                     sciences. It bears the weight of a book. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p113">113</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p113">In many cases, the committees that assign credit to academics for publishing
                     books and articles resist crediting the development of software with the same
                     power on the basis of the <em class="emph">plurality</em> of labor represented by the
                     creation of an infrastructural project. Infrastructure often represents the
                     product of collaborations, where “labs” of scholars and students, or
                     hybrids of scholars working with university staff and/or private contractors,
                     produce the design for the project and its execution. It can, after all, be
                     difficult to isolate the contribution of a single party working on a project
                     [<a class="ref" href="#edmond2015">Edmond 2015</a>]. Typically, in these collaborative labs, coders
                     and scholars collaborate to design a visual and interpretive strategy that
                     governs how users interact with the data. The end product reflects ongoing
                     collaborations, much as an edited book may be conceived of and rallied by a
                     single scholar but may represent the work of many hands. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p114">114</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p114">In some of the most useful cases, for instance the <cite class="title italic">Zotero</cite> software for citation management, the continuing usability
                     of the infrastructure in question depends upon ongoing updates managed by
                     graduate students, salaried coders, full-time staff, and administrators, whose
                     tasks range from insuring interoperability with users’ machines to managing
                     lawsuits. In any case, the range of labor provided – from coding and design to
                     data collection, cleaning, analysis, and more – is more diverse than the
                     traditional scholarly processes of archival research, analysis, and writing,
                     because it requires the scholars involved to conceive of their arguments in
                     visual terms, and to produce multiple visualizations that align with different
                     perspectives on the data in question. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p115">115</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p115"> Yet the plurality of labor necessary to realize infrastructure is only part of
                     the story of why the university community is sometimes hostile towards
                     infrastructure projects. A turn towards personal autobiography will be useful
                     here. As a scholar of the history of infrastructure who researched
                     eighteenth-century road building and wayfinding through traditional archival
                     means, I came to the digital humanities primarily as a researcher interested in
                     how keyword search was changing my own techniques of research. Initially, I
                     resisted the idea of building infrastructure, preferring to think of myself
                     exclusively as an author of books and articles and a consumer of tools developed
                     by others. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p116">116</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p116"> The flowering of new tools in the digital humanities – the “infrastructure turn” identified by Geoffrey Rockwell (2010) —
                     persuaded me that scholars with active the gap between existing tools for
                     annotation, curation, and story-telling – such as <cite class="title italic">Zotero</cite> and <cite class="title italic">Omeka</cite> – and the array of
                     text-mining and visualization practices coming into being from computer science.
                     Some of those projects were created by affiliates of research universities such
                     as George Mason, which had a firm commitment to building infrastructure, and
                     whose graduates were distinguished by their knowledge of servers and code.
                     Others were the work of senior faculty, who had already built a career composed
                     of multiple books, who turned to building infrastructure at an advanced stage in
                     their career when they could command a multi-year research project to build an
                     infrastructure around an infrastructure of particular interest to themselves and
                     their students. Admiration for those accomplishments made me question archival
                     research as the sole expression of scholarly research and argumentation, and
                     opened the door for my curiosity about infrastructure-building. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p117">117</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p117"> In 2010, I began writing grants and talking to colleagues about the possibility
                     of building an infrastructure for the digital humanities and social sciences. I
                     imagined that building a tool that would distill scholarly knowledge into
                     frequently-repeated patterns, extending the scholar’s power of recognizing
                     patterns over tens of thousands or millions of documents, and thus acting as a
                     kind of scholarly prosthesis. Working in research-focused departments
                     nevertheless forced me to reconcile my admiration for scholarly infrastructure
                     with my own needs, as well as the needs of my students and colleagues – all of
                     us, of course, being researchers at first-tier research programs, who were
                     incentivized above all to discover new outlooks on the past, whether from
                     archivally-new materials or from a new perspective on events already known but
                     insufficiently understood. It was hard to imagine a single tool that would serve
                     this purpose. The graduate students who I worked with at Chicago had extremely
                     diverse research backgrounds and interests – ranging from early-modern Germany,
                     to modern Latin America and nineteenth-century Chicago. The tool that would
                     serve my research-focused students would necessarily need to work with documents
                     of concern to them all, using existing language-processing algorithms and
                     visualizations to offer insight into documents of different kinds. Thus it was
                     important to build a tool that would allow researchers invested in text from a
                     range of backgrounds to profit from the tools of word-count analysis and topic
                     modeling then being used by a handful of scholars in the digital humanities. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p118">118</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p118"> Cora Johnson-Roberson and I released <cite class="title italic">Paper Machines</cite>
                     in 2012 with little fanfare. My primary attention remained on publishing books
                     and articles. I documented very little of the thinking behind the
                     infrastructure, having set forward a grand theory about the potential usefulness
                     of topic modeling for history in <cite class="title italic">The History
                        Manifesto</cite>. I awaited a signal that my home department and discipline
                     valued this kind of work. What happened, much to my chagrin, was a signal of the
                     opposite nature: when senior faculty in British history proved hostile to the
                     reasoning of <cite class="title italic">The History Manifesto</cite>, the grounds for
                     tenure laid out at my hiring were reversed; I was ordered to write a third book
                     on the British railway system, and it was conveyed to me that the department was
                     outright hostile to my continued use of digital methods. Far from recognizing
                     the value of a piece of infrastructure developed by a junior scholar, the
                     infrastructure had become an albatross. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p119">119</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p119"> In the vita that I had submitted to my committee for tenure, I had placed <cite class="title italic">Paper Machines</cite> alongside two books and a million
                     dollar grant under a heading of “book weight projects”. The committee
                     recommended that I remove <cite class="title italic">Paper Machines</cite> to a
                     section on “miscellaneous projects”. The message to me was clear:
                     infrastructure would not be valued alongside books and articles as a marker of
                     scholarly labor, intellectual value, or theory-driven critique. Today, <cite class="title italic">Paper Machines</cite> is no longer maintained – a fact that
                     highlights the differentials of commitment between senior faculty and junior
                     faculty. As with the train system in the Parisian suburbs, junior faculty
                     projects unprotected by senior administrators are liable to be refused
                     maintenance and so degrade.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p120">120</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p120"> Things might have gone otherwise, of course, had there been intellectual
                     apparatus explaining infrastructure development as a form of scholarship,
                     infused with the values of critique: my investments of time might have been
                     viewed as a viable form of scholarship and a valuable investment in future forms
                     of scholarly community, rather than a dangerous action inappropriate for junior
                     faculty. The problem was essentially that investments in scholarly
                     infrastructure were obscure from the point-of-view of existing scholarly
                     institutions; they could be seen neither as a form of scholarly argumentation,
                     nor as a critical reflection on contemporary scholarly practice. In order for
                     that resistance to give way, scholars would need to document the history,
                     debate, and values out of which new experiments with infrastructure were
                     emerging. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p121">121</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p121"> Institutional resistance to a culture of experimentation, however, is a wicked
                     problem, in that no one solution is sufficient to overcome it: a single major
                     publication is rarely sufficient to shift a culture. I began to develop such a
                     justification for scholarly infrastructure projects in my second book, <cite class="title italic">The History Manifesto</cite>, which set forward the promise
                     of tools like topic modeling for opening up <em class="term">longue-durée</em> analysis of problems to historical analysis. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p122">122</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p122"> I delayed writing explicitly about infrastructure as scholarly production and
                     intellectual critique. Very few articles reflect on the process of building or
                     state a case for the role of argumentation and thought in infrastructure design;
                     there was very little, in 2013 and 2014, to point to by way of a
                     firmly-established “infrastructure turn” that would be acceptable to senior
                     historians. Indeed, at 2019, this essay offers a much-delayed assessment of the
                     role of critical thinking in the design of Paper Machines in 2009-13. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p123">123</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p123"> The double-binds that I faced in 2014 – resistance to the digital humanities,
                     resistance to infrastructure-building, and few incentives to document the
                     critical thinking behind existing infrastructure experimentation – amounted to
                     an incentive for delay. After initial hostility to the broad-brushstrokes with
                     which I praised the potential of the digital humanities in the <cite class="title italic">Manifesto</cite>, I delayed writing further about
                     infrastructure, in part, because the culture of resistance I faced meant that
                     even this kind of scholarly commentary on experimentation would itself be
                     rendered suspect by tenure review committees by the same hostility that the
                     article needed to challenge. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p124">124</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p124">We might refer to a culture that resists innovation, because the terms that
                     inspire innovation are obscure and hostility as rife, as a “culture of
                     delay”.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p125">125</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p125"> My own partial and much-delayed engagement with these problems may be
                     symptomatic of larger failures of acknowledgement for the builders of scholarly
                     infrastructure, as well as our own hesitance to explain our values. Scholars who
                     have come to make major investments of time and energy in building
                     infrastructure rarely justify those projects in scholarly or public venues,
                     perhaps because the intellectual labor behind the work or the time dedicated to
                     infrastructure projects is likely to be dismissed, and the labor judged with
                     hostility. The failure of institutions to recognize or reward scholarly
                     infrastructure compounds almost certainly compounds scholars’ slowness to
                     highlight the intellectual values or merit expressed by their infrastructure
                     building projects. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p126">126</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p126"> I therefore propose that the remedy for culture of delay is, ironically, more
                     theory: theory in the service of illuminating the alignments that compel some
                     scholars to experiment with building and sharing infrastructure at scale. The
                     builders of infrastructure need to theorize openly about the choices they have
                     made and the values that those choices represent. The foregoing principles have
                     been offered for the sake of waymarking out some broad and familiar territory,
                     but future theorists of scholarly infrastructure will necessarily have to take
                     up the challenge of setting up their own waymarkers, or arguing with and thus
                     refining the extremely preliminary terms in which I have framed values such as
                     “community ownership” or “transparency”. In that process of
                     scholarly debate, a trail of references will be created that will familiarize
                     critical thinking about infrastructure for mainstream communities of scholars.
                     
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Conclusion: The Work of Scholarly Infrastructure Projects </h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p127">127</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p127"> What sort of work, then, is the labor that goes into a humanistic web site? This
                     article has already suggested that the principles governing that academic labor
                     reflect not only bibliographic and scholarly traditions, but also discourse from
                     critical theory about the liberatory potential of knowledge and participatory
                     research. A strong argument has thus just been made for infrastructure-building,
                     in the humanities, as a site of intellectual argumentation, so long as the
                     process of designing and building the infrastructure entails some moment of
                     reflection upon the principles that governed its design and their inspiration
                     (which need not, of course, replicate the principles outlined here).
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p128">128</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p128">Clear though the argument may be for critical reflections on infrastructure as a
                     form of scholarly argument, some account must be given of why so little critical
                     discourse exists on the building of digital humanities projects of this kind. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p129">129</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p129">This article has proposed nine criteria of critical thinking about infrastructure
                     demonstrated in mainstream projects which demonstrate an engagement by the
                     designers with ideas about the humanities. Two of those criteria – those I have
                     labeled “critical principles” – demonstrate that scholarly infrastructure
                     embodies political and argumentative work prized by some scholars, for example,
                     those concerned with the defense of democracy, or the radicalization of
                     community access to knowledge. Projects that demonstrate these criteria show
                     that the designers have actively prepared the infrastructure so as to engage
                     with the concerns of their discipline, and building, under these concerns,
                     represents an act of engaged criticism and argument. Many of what I have called
                     the “bibliographic principles” also demonstrate an engagement with critical
                     thinking, and also with the political insights of social theory, in the form of
                     an engagement with infrastructure as a tool of power. Infrastructure projects
                     that demonstrate these both criteria suggest that practitioners have not only
                     engaged with the concerns of their discipline, but with the critical theory of
                     the last half-century as well, particularly as translated through the
                     social/historical infrastructure turn and its critique of the infrastructure of
                     knowledge-making. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p130">130</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p130">In other words, the realization of the critical principles in acts of scholarly
                     development demonstrate that a wide variety of infrastructure-builders are
                     actively engaging a wide-ranging critique of the institutions of knowledge and
                     their political power. Here, scholarly engagement and argumentation are taken to
                     an extreme largely unknown in the traditional disciplines. A double
                     infrastructure turn – combining social insight and technological building – is
                     at work, which merits the inspection of scholars across the academy.
                     Infrastructure building is the present-day site of engagement with the insights
                     about power and governmentality that defined the scholarly infrastructure turn.
                     
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Acknowledgements</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p131">131</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p131">The author wishes to thank Colin Allen and the anonymous reviewer from <cite class="title italic">DHQ</cite> for their insightful engagement and generous
                     reactions, as well as the editors and other contributors to the special
                     issue.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
            </div>
            
            <div id="notes">
               <h2>Notes</h2>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e1209"><span class="noteRef lang en">[1] The scholar in question left the university in
                     protest, prior to the activation of the inquisitor panel or the tenure
                     review board. The review panel was proposed alongside a series of
                     requirements that would have allowed the department to dictate the scholar’s
                     future research projects, demands that, in the context of the scholar’s
                     publication history, appeared designed explicitly to punish new research
                     agendas. </span></div>
            </div>
            <div id="worksCited">
               <h2>Works Cited</h2>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="aiello2018">
                     <!-- close -->Aiello et al. 2018</span> Aiello, Daniella, et al. “Eviction Lab Misses the Mark”. <cite class="title italic">Shelterforce</cite> (August 22, 2018), accessed Apr. 8, 2020. <a href="https://shelterforce.org/2018/08/22/eviction-lab-misses-the-mark/" onclick="window.open('https://shelterforce.org/2018/08/22/eviction-lab-misses-the-mark/'); return false" class="ref">https://shelterforce.org/2018/08/22/eviction-lab-misses-the-mark/</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="arnstein1969">
                     <!-- close -->Arnstein 1969</span> Arnstein, Sherry R. “A Ladder Of Citizen Participation”. <cite class="title italic">Journal of the American Institute of Planners</cite> 35, no.
                  4 (1969): 216–24. <a href="https://doi.org/10.1080/01944366908977225" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.1080/01944366908977225'); return false" class="ref">https://doi.org/10.1080/01944366908977225</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="aspden2019">
                     <!-- close -->Aspden 2019</span> Aspden, Suzanne. “Introduction”. In Suzanne Aspden, ed., <cite class="title italic">Operatic
                     Geographies: The Place of Opera and the Opera House</cite>. University of
                  Chicago Press, 2019.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="bamman2014">
                     <!-- close -->Bamman et al. 2014</span> Bamman, David, Ted Underwood
                  and Noah Smith. “A Bayesian Mixed Effects Model of Literary
                  Character”. In <cite class="title italic">Proceedings of the 52nd Annual
                     Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics</cite>, 2014:
                  370-379.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="barthes1974">
                     <!-- close -->Barthes 1974</span> Barthes, Roland. <cite class="title italic">S/Z: An Essay</cite>. Trans. Richard Miller. New York: Hill
                  and Wang, 1974.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="cheney2011">
                     <!-- close -->Cheney et al. 2012</span> Cheney, James, Anthony
                  Finkelstein, Bertram Ludaescher, and Stijn Vansummeren. “Principles of Provenance (Dagstuhl Seminar 12091)”. Edited by James
                  Cheney, Anthony Finkelstein, Bertram Ludaescher, and Stijn Vansummeren. <cite class="title italic">Dagstuhl Reports</cite> 2, no. 2 (2012): 84–113. <a href="https://doi.org/10.4230/DagRep.2.2.84" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.4230/DagRep.2.2.84'); return false" class="ref">https://doi.org/10.4230/DagRep.2.2.84</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="clement2017">
                     <!-- close -->Clement et al. 2017</span> Clement, Tanya E., et al.
                  “Challenges for New Infrastructures and Paradigms in DH
                  Curricular Program Development”. <cite class="title italic">DH</cite>,
                  2017.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="denis2014">
                     <!-- close -->Denis and Pontille 2014</span> Denis, Jérôme, and David
                  Pontille. “Material Ordering and the Care of
                  Things”. <cite class="title italic">Science, Technology, &amp; Human
                     Values</cite> 40, no. 3 (2014): 338–67. <a href="https://doi.org/10.1177/0162243914553129" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.1177/0162243914553129'); return false" class="ref">https://doi.org/10.1177/0162243914553129</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="edmond2015">
                     <!-- close -->Edmond 2015</span> Edmond, Jennifer. “Collaboration and Infrastructure”. In <cite class="title italic">A New
                     Companion to Digital Humanities</cite>, 54–65. John Wiley &amp; Sons, Ltd,
                  2015. <a href="https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118680605.ch4" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118680605.ch4'); return false" class="ref">https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118680605.ch4</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="flanders2013">
                     <!-- close -->Flanders and Hamlin 2013</span> Flanders, Julia, and
                  Scott Hamlin. “TAPAS: Building a TEI Publishing and
                  Repository Service”. <cite class="title italic">Journal of the Text
                     Encoding Initiative</cite>, no. Issue 5, Issue 5, Text Encoding Initiative
                  Consortium, Apr. 2013. <cite class="title italic">journals.openedition.org</cite>,
                  doi:<a href="https://doi.org/10.4000/jtei.788" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.4000/jtei.788'); return false" class="ref">10.4000/jtei.788</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="godh2018">
                     <!-- close -->GO::DH 2018</span> GO::DH. “Minimal
                  Computing (GO::DH Site)”. <cite class="title italic">Minimal
                     Computing</cite>, 2018. <a href="http://go-dh.github.io/mincomp/about/" onclick="window.open('http://go-dh.github.io/mincomp/about/'); return false" class="ref">http://go-dh.github.io/mincomp/about/</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="gpp2017">
                     <!-- close -->GPP 2017</span> Grassroots Policy Project. “Building Social Movement Infrastructure”. <cite class="title italic">Racial Equity Tools</cite>, 2017. <a href="http://www.racialequitytools.org/resourcefiles/socialmovement_infrastructure.pdf" onclick="window.open('http://www.racialequitytools.org/resourcefiles/socialmovement_infrastructure.pdf'); return false" class="ref">http://www.racialequitytools.org/resourcefiles/socialmovement_infrastructure.pdf</a>. <a href="https://cistudies.org/wp-content/plugins/zotpress/lib/request/request.cite.php?api_user_id=704687&amp;item_key=TIPENMES" onclick="window.open('https://cistudies.org/wp-content/plugins/zotpress/lib/request/request.cite.php?api_user_id=704687&amp;item_key=TIPENMES'); return false" class="ref">CITE</a>
                  
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="gil2018">
                     <!-- close -->Gil 2018</span> Gil, Alex. “Nimble
                  Tents”. College Park, Maryland: University of Maryland (Tuesday,
                  November 6, 2018). <a href="https://mith.umd.edu/dialogues/dd-fall-2018-alex-gil/" onclick="window.open('https://mith.umd.edu/dialogues/dd-fall-2018-alex-gil/'); return false" class="ref">https://mith.umd.edu/dialogues/dd-fall-2018-alex-gil/</a>. 
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="gold2018">
                     <!-- close -->Gold 2018</span> Gold, Matthew K. “Response to Critical Infrastructure Studies Panel”, 2018. <a href="https://hcommons.org/deposits/item/hc:17831/" onclick="window.open('https://hcommons.org/deposits/item/hc:17831/'); return false" class="ref">https://hcommons.org/deposits/item/hc:17831/</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="graham2007">
                     <!-- close -->Graham and Thrift 2007</span> Graham, Stephen, and Nigel
                  Thrift. “Out of Order: Understanding Repair and
                  Maintenance”. <cite class="title italic">Theory, Culture, and
                     Society</cite> 24, no. 3 (2007): 10–11. <a href="https://doi.org/10.1177/0263276407075954" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.1177/0263276407075954'); return false" class="ref">https://doi.org/10.1177/0263276407075954</a>. 
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="guldi2017">
                     <!-- close -->Guldi 2017</span> Guldi, Jo. “A
                  History of the Participatory Map”. <cite class="title italic">Public
                     Culture</cite> 29, no. 1 81 (January 1, 2017): 79–112. <a href="https://doi.org/10.1215/08992363-3644409" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.1215/08992363-3644409'); return false" class="ref">https://doi.org/10.1215/08992363-3644409</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="guldi2018a">
                     <!-- close -->Guldi 2018a</span> —. “Critical
                  Search: A Procedure for Guided Reading in Large-Scale Textual
                  Corpora”. <cite class="title italic">Journal of Cultural Analytics</cite>,
                  2018. <a href="https://doi.org/10.22148/16.030" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.22148/16.030'); return false" class="ref">https://doi.org/10.22148/16.030</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="guldi2018b">
                     <!-- close -->Guldi 2018b</span> —. “Global
                  Questions About Rent and the Longue Durée of Urban Power, 1848 to the
                  Present”. <cite class="title italic">New Global Studies</cite> 12, no. 1
                  (2018): 37–63. <a href="https://doi.org/10.1515/ngs-2018-0012" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.1515/ngs-2018-0012'); return false" class="ref">https://doi.org/10.1515/ngs-2018-0012</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="henke1999">
                     <!-- close -->Henke 1999</span> Henke, Christopher R. “The Mechanics of Workplace Order: Toward a Sociology of
                  Repair”. <cite class="title italic">Berkeley Journal of
                     Sociology</cite> 44, no. 1999–2000 (1999): 55–81. <a href="http://www.jstor.org/stable/41035546" onclick="window.open('http://www.jstor.org/stable/41035546'); return false" class="ref">http://www.jstor.org/stable/41035546</a>. <a href="https://cistudies.org/wp-content/plugins/zotpress/lib/request/request.cite.php?api_user_id=704687&amp;item_key=FGMWI83E" onclick="window.open('https://cistudies.org/wp-content/plugins/zotpress/lib/request/request.cite.php?api_user_id=704687&amp;item_key=FGMWI83E'); return false" class="ref">CITE</a>
                  
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="jyoti1992">
                     <!-- close -->Jyoti 1992</span> Jyoti, Hosagrahar. “City as Durbar: Theater and Power in Imperial Delhi”. <cite class="title italic">Forms of Dominance: On the Architecture and Urbanism of the
                     Colonial Enterprise</cite>, 1992, 83–105.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="lansdall-welfare2017">
                     <!-- close -->Lansdall-Welfare et al. 2017</span> Thomas
                  Lansdall-Welfare, Saatviga Sudhahar, et al. “Content
                  Analysis of 150 Years of British Periodicals”. <cite class="title italic">PNAS (Proceedings of the National Academy of the Sciences)</cite>, vol.
                  114, no. 4, Jan. 2017, pp. E457–E465, doi:<a href="https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1606380114" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1606380114'); return false" class="ref">10.1073/pnas.1606380114</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="liu2012">
                     <!-- close -->Liu 2012</span> Liu, Alan. “Where Is
                  Cultural Criticism in the Digital Humanities?”, in Matthew Gold and
                  Lauren Klein, eds, <cite class="title italic">Debates in the Digital
                     Humanities</cite> (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2012),
                  accessed January 29, 2019, <a href="http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/debates/text/20" onclick="window.open('http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/debates/text/20'); return false" class="ref">http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/debates/text/20</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="liu2016">
                     <!-- close -->Liu 2016</span> Liu, Alan. <cite class="title italic">Drafts
                     for Against the Cultural Singularity</cite> (book in progress). 2 May
                  2016. <a href="https://liu.english.ucsb.edu/drafts-for-against-the-cultural-singularity" onclick="window.open('https://liu.english.ucsb.edu/drafts-for-against-the-cultural-singularity'); return false" class="ref">http://liu.english.ucsb.edu/drafts-for-against-the-cultural-singularity</a>
                  
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="locke20016">
                     <!-- close -->Locke 2006</span> Locke, Ralph P. “<cite class="title italic">Aida</cite> and Nine Readings of Empire”.
                  <cite class="title italic">Nineteenth-Century Music Review</cite>, vol. 3, no. 1,
                  June 2006, pp. 45–72. <cite class="title italic">Crossref</cite>, doi:<a href="https://doi.org/10.1017/S1479409800000343" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.1017/S1479409800000343'); return false" class="ref">10.1017/S1479409800000343</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="lothian2013">
                     <!-- close -->Lothian and Phillips 2013</span> Lothian, Alexis and
                  Amanda Phillips, “Can Digital Humanities Mean Transformative
                  Critique?” E-Media Studies 3.1 (2013): DOI: <a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1349/PS1.1938-6060.A.425" onclick="window.open('http://dx.doi.org/10.1349/PS1.1938-6060.A.425'); return false" class="ref">10.1349/PS1.1938-6060.A.425</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="mcpherson2010">
                     <!-- close -->McPherson 2010</span> McPherson, Tara. “Scaling Vectors: Thoughts on the Future of Scholarly
                  Communication”. <cite class="title italic">Journal of Electronic
                     Publishing</cite>, vol. 13, no. 2, Fall 2010, doi:<a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.3998/3336451.0013.208" onclick="window.open('http://dx.doi.org/10.3998/3336451.0013.208'); return false" class="ref">http://dx.doi.org/10.3998/3336451.0013.208</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="posner2013">
                     <!-- close -->Posner 2013</span> Posner, Miriam. “No Half Measures: Overcoming Common Challenges to Doing Digital Humanities
                  in the Library”. <cite class="title italic">Journal of Library
                     Administration</cite> 53, no. 1 (January 1, 2013): 43–52. <a href="https://doi.org/10.1080/01930826.2013.756694" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.1080/01930826.2013.756694'); return false" class="ref">https://doi.org/10.1080/01930826.2013.756694</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="rheingold2008">
                     <!-- close -->Rheingold 2008</span> Rheingold, Howard. “Participative Pedagogy: For a Literacy of Literacies”.
                  In <cite class="title italic">Freesouls</cite>, ed. Joi Ito. Taiwan: Adams, 2008.
                  <a href="http://freesouls.cc/essays/03-howard-rheingold-participative-pedagogy-for-a-literacy-of-literacies.html" onclick="window.open('http://freesouls.cc/essays/03-howard-rheingold-participative-pedagogy-for-a-literacy-of-literacies.html'); return false" class="ref">http://freesouls.cc/essays/03-howard-rheingold-participative-pedagogy-for-a-literacy-of-literacies.html</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="rockwell2010">
                     <!-- close -->Rockwell 2010</span> Rockwell, Geoffrey. “As Transparent as Infrastructure: On the research of
                  cyberinfrastructure in the humanities”. <cite class="title italic">Online
                     Humanities Scholarship: The Shape of Things to Come</cite>. Edited by
                  Jerome McGann. Rice University Press, 2010. <a href="http://rup.rice.edu/cnx_content/shape/m34315.html." onclick="window.open('http://rup.rice.edu/cnx_content/shape/m34315.html.'); return false" class="ref">http://rup.rice.edu/cnx_content/shape/m34315.html.</a>
                  
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="shannon2014">
                     <!-- close -->Shannon 2014</span> Mattern, Shannon. “Library as Infrastructure”. <cite class="title italic">Places
                     Journal</cite>, June 2014. <cite class="title italic">placesjournal.org</cite>,
                  doi:<a href="https://doi.org/10.22269/140609" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.22269/140609'); return false" class="ref">10.22269/140609</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="shannon2018">
                     <!-- close -->Shannon 2018</span> —. “Maintenance
                  and Care”. <cite class="title italic">Places Journal</cite>, 2018. <a href="https://placesjournal.org/article/maintenance-and-care/" onclick="window.open('https://placesjournal.org/article/maintenance-and-care/'); return false" class="ref">https://placesjournal.org/article/maintenance-and-care/</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="so2019">
                     <!-- close -->So et al. 2019</span> So, Richard, et al. “Race, Writing, and Computation: Racial Difference and the US
                  Novel, 1880-2000”. <cite class="title italic">Journal of Cultural
                     Analytics</cite>, 2019. <cite class="title italic">Crossref</cite>, doi:<a href="https://doi.org/10.22148/16.031" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.22148/16.031'); return false" class="ref">10.22148/16.031</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="underwood2018">
                     <!-- close -->Underwood et al. 2018</span> Underwood, Ted, et al.
                  “The Transformation of Gender in English-Language
                  Fiction”. Cultural Analytics. February 12, 2018. DOI: <a href="https://library.brown.edu/easyaccess/find/?__char_set=utf8&amp;id=doi:10.7910/DVN/TEGMGI&amp;sid=libx&amp;genre=article" onclick="window.open('https://library.brown.edu/easyaccess/find/?__char_set=utf8&amp;id=doi:10.7910/DVN/TEGMGI&amp;sid=libx&amp;genre=article'); return false" class="ref">10.7910/DVN/TEGMGI</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="vacano2017">
                     <!-- close -->Vacano et al. 2017</span> Vacano, Claudia von, Abigail T.
                  De Kosnik, and Stephen Best. “Digital Humanities at Berkeley
                  and the Digital Life Project”. In <cite class="title italic">DH</cite>,
                  2017.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="vertesi2019">
                     <!-- close -->Vertesi and Ribers 2019</span> Vertesi, Janet, and David
                  Ribes. <cite class="title italic">DigitalSTS: A Field Guide for Science &amp;
                     Technology Studies</cite>. Princeton University Press, 2019.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="vismann2008">
                     <!-- close -->Vismann and Winthrop-Young 2008</span> Vismann,
                  Cornelia, and Geoffrey Winthrop-Young. <cite class="title italic">Files: Law and Media
                     Technology</cite>. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press,
                  2008.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="wagner2015">
                     <!-- close -->Wagner et al. 2015</span> Wagner, Claudia, et al. “It's a Man's Wikipedia? Asssessing Gender Inequality in an
                  Online Enyclopedia”. The International AAAI Conference on Web and
                  Social Media (ICWSM 2015), <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/1501.06307v2" onclick="window.open('https://arxiv.org/abs/1501.06307v2'); return false" class="ref">https://arxiv.org/abs/1501.06307v2</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="weil2006">
                     <!-- close -->Weil 2006</span> Weil, Benjamin. “The
                  Rivers Come: Colonial Flood Control and Knowledge Systems in the Indus
                  Basin, 1840s-1930s”. <cite class="title italic">Environment and
                     History</cite>, 2006, 3–29.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="williams2008">
                     <!-- close -->Williams 2008</span> Williams, R. “Cultural Origins and Environmental Implications of Large Technological
                  Systems”. <cite class="title italic">Science in Context</cite> 6, no. 02
                  (2008): 377–403. 
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="zhang2019">
                     <!-- close -->Zhang et al. 2019</span> Zhang, Siyang, Nicholas Shapiro,
                  Gretchen Gehrke, Jessica Castner, Zhenlei Liu, Beverly Guo, Romesh Prasad, et
                  al. “Smartphone App for Residential Testing of Formaldehyde
                  (SmART-Form)”. <cite class="title italic">Building and Environment</cite>
                  148 (January 15, 2019): 567–78. <a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2018.11.029" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2018.11.029'); return false" class="ref">https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2018.11.029</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="aundert2012">
                     <!-- close -->Zundert 2012</span> Zundert, Joris van. “If You Build It, Will We Come? Large Scale Digital
                  Infrastructures as a Dead End for Digital Humanities”. <cite class="title italic">Historical Social Research / Historische
                     Sozialforschung</cite> 37, no. 3 (141) (2012): 165–86.
               </div>
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar"><a href="#">Preview</a>  |  <span style="color: grey">XML</span> |  <a href="#" onclick="javascript:window.print();" title="Click for print friendly version">Print Article</a></div>
         </div>
      </div>
   </body>
</html>