<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <title>[PREVIEW] DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly: </title>
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_screen.css"
            media="screen"
            type="text/css"
            rel="stylesheet"/>
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_print.css"
            media="print"
            type="text/css"
            rel="stylesheet"/>
      <style type="text/css">
        #mainContent {
          float: none;
          padding-top: 2em;
          padding-left: 4em;
          padding-right: 4em;
          margin-left: 225px;
           
        }</style>
      <script src="../../common/js/javascriptLibrary.js" type="text/javascript"/>
   </head>
   <body>
      <div id="mainContent">
         <div class="DHQarticle">
            <div id="pubInfo">Preview<br/>Volume  Number </div>
            <div class="toolbar">
               <form id="taporware" action="get">
                  <div>
                     <a href="/dhq/preview/index.html">Preview</a>
                     | 
                    <a rel="external"
                        href="/dhq/vol///&#xA;                    000197&#xA;                .xml">XML</a>

| 
		   Discuss
			(<a href="/dhq/vol///&#xA;                    000197&#xA;                /&#xA;                    000197&#xA;                .html#disqus_thread"
                        data-disqus-identifier="&#xA;                    000197&#xA;                ">
				Comments
			</a>)
                </div>
               </form>
            </div>
            <div class="DHQheader">
        
            
                
                <h1 class="articleTitle">Reading Today</h1>
                <div class="author">
                  <span style="color: grey">Frédéric Clavert </span> &lt;<a href="mailto:frederic_at_clavert_dot_net"
                     onclick="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('frederic_at_clavert_dot_net'); return false;"
                     onkeypress="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('frederic_at_clavert_dot_net'); return false;">frederic_at_clavert_dot_net</a>&gt;, Université Paris-Sorbonne</div>
            
            

            
        
        
        
        
               <span xmlns=""
                     class="Z3988"
                     title="url_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;rft_val_fmt=info%3Aofi%2Ffmt%3Akev%3Amtx%3Ajournal&amp;rfr_id=info%3Asid%2Fzotero.org%3A2&amp;rft.genre=article&amp;rft.atitle=Reading%20Today&amp;rft.jtitle=Digital%20Humanities%20Quarterly&amp;rft.stitle=DHQ&amp;rft.issn=1938-4122&amp;rft.date=&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.aulast=Clavert&amp;rft.aufirst=Frédéric&amp;rft.au=Frédéric%20Clavert"> </span>
            </div>

            <div id="DHQtext">
        
               <div id="abstract">
                  <h2>Abstract</h2>
                
                  <p>A review of Claire Clivaz, Jérôme Meizoz, François Vallotton, et Joseph
                    Verheyden, éds. <cite class="title italic">Lire demain: Des manuscrits antiques à
                        l’ère digitale</cite> [<cite class="title italic">Reading Tomorrow: From Ancient
                        Manuscripts to the Digital Era</cite>]. (Lausanne: Presses polytechniques
                    et universitaires romandes, 2012). 978-2-88074-958-3.</p>
               </div>
            
        
        
            
               <div class="counter">
                  <a href="#p1">1</a>
               </div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p1">This book is a collection of the proceedings of the colloquium organized at Lausanne
                University in August 2011 [<a class="ref" href="#clivaz2012">Clivaz et al. 2012</a>]. Chapters are in English or
                French; some of them (notably the introduction and Claire Clivaz's chapter about
                    the <cite class="title italic">Common Era 2.0</cite>) are in both languages. Other
                sessions were held in French and are available as videos and in English prose, such
                as Frédéric Kaplan's <cite class="title italic">How Books will Become
                Machines</cite>.</div>
               <div class="counter">
                  <a href="#p2">2</a>
               </div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p2">The editors, together with the publisher (Presses polytechniques et universitaires
                romandes), attempted to innovate in the way they published the book. Three elements
                are available: a printed book, an extended ebook version, and videos of the
                interventions that are still available both on the Lausanne University's website and
                on iTunes U [<a class="ref" href="#lausanne2012">Université de Lausanne 2012</a>].<a class="noteRef" href="#d3e178">[1]</a> The articulation between written and oral
                versions of some papers allows the reader to have several ways of reading and
                listening to the book in accordance with its subject (this review focuses on the
                extended ebook version). However, it is regrettable that the extended ebook
                sometimes lacks a bit of cohesion and coherence. The third to fifth parts are
                notably poorly articulated, mixing chronology and themes, where a clear choice for a
                thematic organization would have been more understandable.</div>
               <div class="counter">
                  <a href="#p3">3</a>
               </div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p3">The colloquium, as stated in the introduction written by the book's editors (Claire
                Clivaz, François Vallotton and Joseph Verheyden), was organized (and the book
                written) in a triple context: the current technological revolution and the changes
                that come with it; the rise of the Digital Humanities including the creation of
                dedicated centers mainly in Anglo-Saxon countries; and the integration of digital
                resources and platforms within universities for both their teaching and research
                activities.</div>
               <div class="counter">
                  <a href="#p4">4</a>
               </div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p4">The book is divided into six parts (Reading and literacies: history and
                representations / From Ancient Manuscripts to the Digital Edition / Antiquity,
                Literacies and Digital Culture / Early Christianity, Literacies and Digital Culture
                / Written Culture and Digital Technologies in Modern History and Literature / Tools
                and Concepts in Digital Culture). What those six titles suggest is confirmed by
                Claire Clivaz's first chapter about a <cite class="title italic">Common Era 2.0,</cite>
                which is to be considered as the book's matrix. It defines the two great and novel
                aspects of this publication: how the digital age questions the previous era (the
                Common Era) in modifying some of its textual traditions, considered previously as
                fixed and irrevocable; and how the digital era helps us rediscover the reading and
                writing modes of Antiquity.</div>
               <div class="counter">
                  <a href="#p5">5</a>
               </div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p5">The first part is centered on the book or its various forms (the novel), its
                evolution in the digital era, and the act of reading books. Christian Vandendorpe
                addresses the consequences of the migration of reading from print to screen on the
                future of the novel as a literary genre, answering, for instance, some criticism by
                Nicholas Carr of fragmented reading [<a class="ref" href="#carr2008">Carr 2008</a>]. He describes how, in
                the past, the novel adapted to various challenges. Confronting the novel and the
                incessant digital flow of information, Vandendorpe suggests that the novel should
                find an appropriate digital platform that integrates multimedia documents and Web
                2.0 participatory and collaborative dimensions. This should give a new and active
                role to the reader.</div>
               <div class="counter">
                  <a href="#p6">6</a>
               </div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p6">Frédéric Kaplan's chapter on the evolution of the book (<cite class="title italic">How
                    Books Will Become Machines</cite>) is based on the use of the theory of
                evolution for technological systems. Analyzing how technologies such as
                encyclopedias and books can evolve towards mechanization, he observes that books are
                resisting this evolution (contrary to encyclopedias), but could survive only if they
                become "closed" applications. He concludes with the fact that our
                cognitive skills can be shaped differently depending on how the book evolves. The
                question, here, is how to experiment to find new applications for complex
                discourses.</div>
               <div class="counter">
                  <a href="#p7">7</a>
               </div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p7">Philippe Kaenel questions the dialogue between text and pictures since antiquity, the
                role of visual culture, and the notion of "literacy". David
                Bouvier reminds us that Christianity transformed the book into an idealized object,
                while we are also the heirs of Plato's views on text, at a time (Ancient Greece)
                when there was no reason to believe in the book's ideal. Holt Parker explains <cite class="title italic">What is it that Philologists Do Exactly?,</cite> reminding us
                that philologists question how the authors expect readers to read the work.</div>
               <div class="counter">
                  <a href="#p8">8</a>
               </div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p8">Jean-Yves Mollier's chapter on <cite class="title italic">Lire, une pratique constamment
                    remise en cause</cite> is an excellent conclusion to the first part. Answering
                the frequent criticisms about the end of paper and the "book's
                    civilization" because of the appearance of screens, Mollier argues
                that the act of reading, previously reserved to clerics, has always been contested,
                especially the access of masses to reading. Analyzing the role of reading online,
                including during the 2011 Arab Spring, he concludes that literature is the only part
                of reading that is endangered. In fact, the many forms of reading today will
                probably lead to the rise of new and creative forms of fiction.</div>
               <div class="counter">
                  <a href="#p9">9</a>
               </div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p9">The second part of the book is dedicated to the notion of edition, from ancient
                manuscripts to the digital edition. Based on his experience, François Bovon explains
                the different steps from catalogue research to the establishment of a critical
                edition and notes that ancient manuscripts are entering into their third age, which
                is also the digital age: an age of digitization and preservation to facilitate
                access to them. Taking the example of the Qumran manuscripts, David Hamidović shows
                (both in French and English) one of the possibilities opened by the digital age for
                the study of ancient texts. Through the use of graphic software, he wishes to
                complete some lost parts of those texts and to study the ways scribes were writing.
                Exploring new possibilities for ancient texts is also fundamental in Mary Ebbott's
                and Leonard Muellner's chapters about Homeric epics: the fluidity and
                multidimensional quality of digital documents and tools are, in fact, very well
                suited to the Iliad's edition. This potential of digital tools will radically change
                the way we do research, argues Ulrich Schmid, based on the experience of the edition
                of the New Testament, where the reader becomes a producer of the edition. The last
                two chapters of this part investigate the bridges between Christian and Arabic
                documents, showing some possible investigations into post-colonial studies opened by
                Digital Humanities and, also, the limits of our Latin-centered digital tools. This
                investigation emphasizes, too, the question of the scholar's place in our world.</div>
               <div class="counter">
                  <a href="#p10">10</a>
               </div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p10">The book's third part — <cite class="title italic">Antiquity, Literacies and Digital
                    Culture</cite> — is more centered on research practices in the digital age and
                on the (non-Christian) antiquity, though it partly harmonizes with the second part
                of the book. Thomas J. Kraus investigates how digital practices help find new
                research subjects. Mathild Cambron-Goulet shows how Greek philosophers were at the
                same time criticizing writing and practicing reading in a community linked to their
                oral tradition. MarieClaire Beaulieu, Francesco Mambrini, and J. Matthew Harrington
                    (<cite class="title italic">Toward a Digital Editio Princeps: Using Digital
                    Technologies to Create a More Complete Scholarly Edition in the
                Classics</cite>) allow us to see what tomorrow's book will be: multimodal,
                interactive, multidimensional, multimedia. Some of their questions on the future of
                books are linked to Frédéric Kaplan's considerations. Alexandra Trachsel(<cite class="title italic">Collecting Fragments Today: What Status Will a Fragment Have in
                    the Era of Digital Philology?</cite>) considers three progressions in the ways
                fragments were transmitted to us: the creation of libraries, the Renaissance and,
                today, the digital era. Floris Bernard (<cite class="title italic">Byzantine Books
                    Epigrams: From Manuscripts to a Digital Database</cite>) shows how a text can
                be transformed into a database and why — in this case to understand a whole
                historical moment and its practices.</div>
               <div class="counter">
                  <a href="#p11">11</a>
               </div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p11">The fourth part of the book is about ancient Christianity and its specificity: the
                hybridity of oral and writing traditions. Giovanni B. Bazzana investigates how a
                text is socially produced, through examples from the apocalyptic genre. Joseph
                Verheyden (<cite class="title italic">Read, Write and Correct: The Scribe and the Perfect
                    Text</cite>) discusses the mythical status of the Codex Sinaiticus. Simon
                Butticaz reminds us that the letters of Paul are the result of a society based on
                oral tradition and illiteracy. Corinne Egasse (<cite class="title italic">Le papyrus
                    Oxyrhynque 840 et Jean 13: du manuscrit mutilé à l’eau purifiante</cite>)
                investigates a specific text very closely. Benjamin Bertho’s chapter (<cite class="title italic">Tradition orale et culture écrite: les Oracles sibyllins chez
                    Théophile d’Antioche et dans la littérature chrétienne</cite>) is an example of
                hybridity between orality and writing.</div>
               <div class="counter">
                  <a href="#p12">12</a>
               </div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p12">The fifth part — <cite class="title italic">Writing Culture and Digital Technologies in
                    Modern History and Literature</cite> — is focused on a more recent period.
                Sandrine Baume investigates the notion of transparency and its detractors, an
                interesting thought for our times of fear of a generalized transparency of our
                private lives. In studying writing and reading practices in modern religious orders,
                Fabienne Henryot gives us an interesting historical insight about how writing is a
                way to impose an orthodoxy / social order and a common tradition. Luis Pablo Núñez's
                chapter — <cite class="title italic">The Impact of the Digital Era on Dictionaries and
                    Encyclopedias</cite> — brings us back to the digital era and its advantages
                regarding a digital edition of dictionaries and encyclopedias, with its
                possibilities of mixing several editions and many ways of reading them. Here, again,
                he connects back to some of Kaplan's considerations. The following chapter about
                    <cite class="title italic">ARQUIBANC </cite>(Elena Cantarell Barella) is, in a way, a
                more traditional digital humanities paper. It is still a very notable contribution,
                as it is centered on the preservation of very hard-to-preserve archives — personal
                ones. Eliza Deac (<cite class="title italic">From Paper to Web Constellations: Between
                    Stéphane Mallarmé’s Un coup de Dés and Stephanie Strickland’s V:
                    Vniverse</cite>) explains the many mutations of poetry along the technological
                evolutions. She points out the usage of the specificities of each medium by poets.
                Nelleke Moser (<cite class="title italic">Collecting Quotes, Connecting People: Towards a
                    Diachronic Approach to Appropriating and Sharing Literature</cite>)
                interrogates the usefulness of sharing and annotating texts and text fragments. This
                part, although made up of very interesting chapters, is probably the most incoherent
                in the book, unfortunately, mixing chapters of very different nature.</div>
               <div class="counter">
                  <a href="#p13">13</a>
               </div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p13">The sixth part — <cite class="title italic">Tools and Concepts in Digital Culture</cite> —
                is more typically DH-oriented, with presentations of tools, such as the chapters
                    on <cite class="title italic">The Project of a "Thesaurus Linguae Arabicae":
                    Linguistic and Computational Issues</cite> (Cristina Solimando &amp; Giuliano
                Lancioni) or Alberto Roncaccia &amp; Davide Picca's piece, <cite class="title italic">Interrogation Programme &amp; SuperSenses Extraction: IPSE, une base de données
                    ouvertes et flexible</cite>. Lukas Rosenthaler's focus on VRE (<cite class="title italic">Virtual Research Environments: A New Approach for Dealing with
                    Digitized Sources in Research in Arts and Humanities</cite>) — is an
                interesting one, based on the JISC definition ("A VRE helps
                    researchers from all disciplines to work collaboratively by managing the
                    increasingly complex range of tasks involved in carrying out research.").
                SALSAH, the VRE described here, was conceptualized as an answer to the lack of tools
                to handle and analyse the consequent masses of digitized archives. Tobias
                    Schweizer (<cite class="title italic">Development of a Topographical Transcription
                    Method</cite>) shows a practical use of the SALSAH framework. Thomas Naef
                    (<cite class="title italic">New Testament Textual Criticism Bibliographical
                    Data</cite>) focuses on the <cite class="title italic">BiBil </cite>(Biblical
                Bibliography of Lausanne) and the <cite class="title italic">New Testament Textual
                    Criticism</cite> (NTTC) projects. Christelle Cocco (<cite class="title italic">Catégorisation automatique de propositions textuelles en types de
                    discours</cite>) presents a statistical method, rather than a tool, in the
                field of speech analysis. She links morphosyntaxic categories with types of speech
                and texts annotated by experts, though those links are yet hard to interpret.
                Solange Ghernaouti-Hélie &amp; René Berger (<cite class="title italic">Techno sacré,
                    cyberespace et protéisme numérique: répondre autrement aux interrogations
                    profondes de l’humain</cite>)sketch what could be a philosophy of the digital
                age. This chapter could have been included in the first part, since it addresses
                foundational ideas. They question our capacity to handle computing and the Internet
                in order to avoid a sheer economic view of the digital age. They acknowledge the
                possibility of a happy merger between humanity and machines, reminding us of but
                being distinct (because it is more poetic) from transhumanism. This chapter, and the
                book that inspired it [<a class="ref" href="#berger2010">Berger and Ghernaouti-Hélié 2010</a>], could be read in parallel to
                Milad Doueihi's <cite class="title italic">Pour un humanisme numérique</cite>
                [<a class="ref" href="#doueihi2012">Doueihi 2012</a>]. The last chapter of the book (Fabien Nobilio, <cite class="title italic">Le livre cosmique. Des Confessions de saint Augustin au culte de
                    l’Internet</cite>), which reads a bit like a conclusion, draws a parallel
                between Saint Augustin's way of considering silent reading, focused on
                self-consciousness, and today's need for transparency, a need which is very much
                linked to the Internet. In linking literacy (the use of a tool) and the symbolic
                dimension of the tool (whether the book or the Internet), Nobilio questions our
                capacity to use our knowledge as a path to freedom. In the end, Nobilio's question
                on whether the Internet will be an incarnation of a celestial book or the opposite
                is a very pertinent one: are we not at a crossroads between the network as a spy on
                our whole lives or as a way to achieve a better humanity?</div>
               <div class="counter">
                  <a href="#p14">14</a>
               </div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p14">For the readers who will read this book in its entirety — and particularly for the
                historian who wrote this review — there is one regret: two parts of our history
                appear as more or less dark ages. The 19th century appears in this book — and
                notably in Clivaz's <cite class="title italic">Common Era 2.0</cite> — as an evil period
                of normalization of the book and reading practices. The Middle Ages — though
                sometimes lightly covered — appear, by their almost complete absence, also as a Dark
                Age. But they are not. As we are in the Digital Humanities field, let us consider
                what motivated Franco Moretti to theorize distant reading as a focus of literary
                studies on "big novels" in the 18th and the 19th centuries [<a class="ref" href="#moretti2007">Moretti 2007</a>]. What Moretti says is, in fact, that those centuries —
                their literature — are not that well known. And this literature is probably more
                liquid, more mobile, less normalized than we think it is. Even for very well-known
                    19<span class="hi superscript">th</span> century authors like Balzac [<a class="ref" href="#gleize2014">Gleize 2014</a>], the articulation between novels published in newspapers
                in installments and the later publication of the novel as a book is not as fixed as
                the image of the 19th century depicted in <cite class="title italic">Lire
                demain</cite>.</div>
               <div class="counter">
                  <a href="#p15">15</a>
               </div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p15">This book is very rich and appeals to everybody interested in or a student of reading
                in the digital age, as well as everyone in the field of Digital Humanities . In the
                end, I have a single question: why "Reading Tomorrow"? Is this book not about
                    "Reading today"?</div>
        
        
            

        
            </div>
            <div id="notes">
               <h2>Notes</h2>
               <div class="endnote" id="d3e178">
                  <span class="noteRef">[1]</span> See, e.g., the (<a class="ref"
                     href="http://av.unil.ch/hva/258/01-moreillon.html"
                     onclick="window.open('http://av.unil.ch/hva/258/01-moreillon.html'); return false">introduction</a>) and
                    Claire Clivaz's <a class="ref"
                     href="http://av.unil.ch/hva/258/02-clivaz.html"
                     onclick="window.open('http://av.unil.ch/hva/258/02-clivaz.html'); return false">intervention</a>.</div>
            </div>
            <div id="worksCited">
               <h2>Works Cited</h2>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="berger2010"><!-- close -->Berger and Ghernaouti-Hélié 2010</span>  René Berger et
                    Solange Ghernaouti-Hélié. <cite class="title italic">Technocivilisation: pour une
                        philosophie du numérique</cite>. Lausanne: Presses polytechniques et
                    universitaires romandes, 2010.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="carr2008"><!-- close -->Carr 2008</span>  Nicholas Carr. "Is
                        Google Making Us Stupid?", <cite class="title italic">The Atlantic</cite>,
                    1 July 2008. &lt;<a class="ref"
                     href="http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2008/07/is-google-making-us-stupid/306868/"
                     onclick="window.open('http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2008/07/is-google-making-us-stupid/306868/'); return false">http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2008/07/is-google-making-us-stupid/306868/</a>&gt;
                    [accessed 1 December 2014]</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="clivaz2012"><!-- close -->Clivaz et al. 2012</span>  Claire Clivaz, Jérôme Meizoz,
                    François Vallotton, et Joseph Verheyden, (Éds). <cite class="title italic">Lire
                        demain: Des manuscrits antiques à l’ère digitale</cite> [<cite class="title italic">Reading Tomorrow: From Ancient Manuscripts to the Digital
                        Era</cite>]. <cite class="title italic">Actes de congrès</cite>. Lausanne:
                    Presses polytechniques et universitaires romandes, 2012. EAN13:
                    978-2-88074-958-3.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="doueihi2012"><!-- close -->Doueihi 2012</span>  Milad Doueihi. <cite class="title italic">Pour un humanisme numérique</cite>. Paris: publie.net, 2012.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="gleize2014"><!-- close -->Gleize 2014</span>  Joëlle Gleize, "Rythmes et Supports de L’écriture Romanesque de Balzac (1831-1836)",
                    in <cite class="title italic">Rythmes. Histoire, littérature</cite>, ed. by Blaise
                    Marie and Vaillant Alain, Collection Des Littératures (Montpellier: Presses
                    universitaires de la Méditerranée, 2014), pp. 245–59 &lt;<a class="ref"
                     href="http://books.openedition.org/pulm/166"
                     onclick="window.open('http://books.openedition.org/pulm/166'); return false">http://books.openedition.org/pulm/166</a>&gt; [accessed 1 December
                    2014]</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="moretti2007"><!-- close -->Moretti 2007</span>  Franco Moretti, <cite class="title italic">Graphs, Maps, Trees: Abstract Models for Literary
                        History</cite> (Verso, 2007).</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="lausanne2012"><!-- close -->Université de Lausanne 2012</span>  Université de
                    Lausanne. <cite class="title italic">Théologie et Sciences Des Religions</cite>,
                    Théologie et Sciences Des Religions, ep. 20 to 43 &lt;<a class="ref"
                     href="https://itunes.apple.com/ch/itunes-u/theologie-et-sciences-des/id495956024?l=fr"
                     onclick="window.open('https://itunes.apple.com/ch/itunes-u/theologie-et-sciences-des/id495956024?l=fr'); return false">https://itunes.apple.com/ch/itunes-u/theologie-et-sciences-des/id495956024?l=fr</a>&gt;
                    [accessed 1 December 2014]</div>
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar">
               <a href="#">Preview</a>  |  <span style="color: grey">XML</span> |  <a href="#"
                  onclick="javascript:window.print();"
                  title="Click for print friendly version">Print Article</a>
            </div>
         </div>
      </div>
   </body>
</html>
