<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <title>[PREVIEW] DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly: </title>
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_screen.css"
            media="screen"
            type="text/css"
            rel="stylesheet"/>
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_print.css"
            media="print"
            type="text/css"
            rel="stylesheet"/>
      <style type="text/css">
        #mainContent {
          float: none;
          padding-top: 2em;
          padding-left: 4em;
          padding-right: 4em;
          margin-left: 225px;
           
        }</style>
      <script src="../../common/js/javascriptLibrary.js" type="text/javascript"/>
   </head>
   <body>
      <div id="mainContent">
         <div class="DHQarticle">
            <div id="pubInfo">Preview<br/>Volume 008 Number 4</div>
            <div class="toolbar">
               <form id="taporware" action="get">
                  <div>
                     <a href="/dhq/vol/8/4/index.html">2014 8.4</a>
                     | 
                    <a rel="external" href="/dhq/vol/8/4/000192.xml">XML</a>

| 
		   Discuss
			(<a href="/dhq/vol/8/4/000192/000192.html#disqus_thread"
                        data-disqus-identifier="000192">
				Comments
			</a>)
                </div>
               </form>
            </div>
            <div class="DHQheader">
        
            
                <h1 class="articleTitle">Versioning Loss: Jonathan Safran Foer’s Tree of Codes and the
                    Materiality of Digital Publishing</h1>
                <div class="author">
                  <span style="color: grey">Aaron Mauro</span> &lt;<a href="mailto:mauro_at_psu_dot_edu"
                     onclick="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('mauro_at_psu_dot_edu'); return false;"
                     onkeypress="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('mauro_at_psu_dot_edu'); return false;">mauro_at_psu_dot_edu</a>&gt;, Penn State Erie, The Behrend College</div>
            
            
            
        
        
        
        
               <span xmlns=""
                     class="Z3988"
                     title="url_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;rft_val_fmt=info%3Aofi%2Ffmt%3Akev%3Amtx%3Ajournal&amp;rfr_id=info%3Asid%2Fzotero.org%3A2&amp;rft.genre=article&amp;rft.atitle=Versioning%20Loss%3A%20Jonathan%20Safran%20Foer%E2%80%99s%20Tree%20of%20Codes%20and%20the%20Materiality%20of%20Digital%20Publishing&amp;rft.jtitle=Digital%20Humanities%20Quarterly&amp;rft.stitle=DHQ&amp;rft.issn=1938-4122&amp;rft.date=2014-12-25&amp;rft.volume=008&amp;rft.issue=4&amp;rft.aulast=Mauro&amp;rft.aufirst=Aaron&amp;rft.au=Aaron%20Mauro"> </span>
            </div>
            <div id="DHQtext">
        
               <div id="abstract">
                  <h2>Abstract</h2>
                  <p>The recent proliferation of experimental literature has produced a critical and
                    creative exchange between the possibilities of print and digital distribution
                    platforms. Through a focused study of Jonathan Safran Foer’s <cite class="title italic">Tree of Codes</cite>, this article confronts the difficulty
                    of citation as an occasion to develop a web based prototype or model of this
                    decidedly paper bound text. The result of this experiment produced a digitized
                    version of Tree of Codes that allows for a further discussion of issues of loss,
                    deformation, and versioning alongside a wider conversation on presentation
                    semantics on the web and browser capabilities. This article argues that
                    experimental features on the web have a great deal to gain in a reciprocal
                    exchange between experimental print media.</p>
               </div>
            
        
        
               <div class="div div0">
                  <div class="epigraph">
                    <blockquote>
                        <p class="ptext">
                        Essentially, all models are wrong, but some are
                            useful.
                         (<span class="bibl">
                              <span class="ref" id="d3e191"><!-- close --></span>George E. P. Box <cite class="title italic">Empirical Model-Building and
                                Response Surfaces</cite>, 1987</span>) 
                    </p>
                     </blockquote>
                  </div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p1">1</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p1"> With the release of Sony’s Reader in 2004 and the subsequent release of Amazon’s
                    Kindle in 2007, the introduction of consumer ebook platforms remains within the
                    realm of recent memory. The relative newness of publishing literature in both
                    open and proprietary formats — whether they are marked with html, epub, pdf,
                    mobi, KF8, or ibook suffixes — demands that publishers and authors take chances
                    with the digitization of literature and accept the risk of modifying literary
                    meaning through digital presentation and dissemination. Since their initial
                    release, each of these formats has been changed and tweaked from version to
                    version. New functionality and bug fixes continue to improve and modify these
                    technologies in subtle increments. The introduction of new formats and platforms
                    has produced an unprecedented period of literary experimentation where
                    versioning becomes the hallmark of software development and academic work in the
                    humanities alike. As the titles of their works become marked by these file
                    format acronyms, contemporary authors are now responding to the digital context
                    in which their works are published with a renewed attention to the materiality
                    of publishing. Simultaneously, the normalization of reflowable text is upending
                    the fixity of print and the stability of the venerable codex. I argue that
                    contemporary novelists are engaging with this new and fluid digital publishing
                    environment by experimenting with the possibilities of print. Because the novel
                    has always been an experimental form — insofar as it has always presumed to be
                        <em class="emph">new</em> — a renewed interest in experimental print texts has come
                    to express an anxiety about the proliferation of digital texts and digitized
                    distribution models for literature. For this reason, I wish to discuss<cite class="title italic"> Tree of Codes</cite> (2010) by Jonathan Safran Foer because
                    it is highly experimental in form and also acknowledges the work of creating
                    digital versions of paperbound books. </div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p2">2</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p2"> This book is, I believe, one of the most coherent responses to the current shift
                    in reading technologies and offers insights into the role of books in the
                    preservation of human history through mechanical reproduction. Foer’s text works
                    as an extension and modification of Johanna Drucker claim in <cite class="title italic">The Century of Artists’ Books </cite>(1995) that the artist
                    book is representative of the 20th century social, cultural, and technological
                    development. In a 21<span class="hi superscript">st</span>-century context, the generic
                    strictures of artist book do not necessarily apply to Foer’s work, but he has
                    taken up a similar formalist avant-garde sensibility in exploring the artistic
                    possibilities of paper in a digital environment. However, any academically
                    situated discussion of Foer’s book demands that such a text submit to some kind
                    of citation, reference, or quotation. This is a book that presents many problems
                    for academic or critical discourse because it cannot be reliably cited. <cite class="title italic">Tree of Codes</cite> is written by die-cutting words from the
                    pages of Bruno Schulz’s 1936 novel <cite class="title italic">The Street of
                        Crocodiles</cite>. The result is a fragile paper latticework of paper tabs
                    that allows the reader to peer through several pages at once and read the
                    remaining text. The experience of reading <cite class="title italic">Tree of
                        Codes</cite> calls to mind the fragility of art and the realization that so
                    much of our artistic legacy has been lost. In this case, <cite class="title italic">Tree of Codes </cite>is a physical reminder of the literary
                    
                    meaning that has been lost to war and the need of art to reconstitute and
                    imagine our past. Schulz was a Polish artist and author of Jewish ethnicity
                    living in Drohobych when the Nazis invaded in 1941. After being kept alive for
                    his skills as a draftsman and storyteller, he was murdered in November of 1942
                    at the hands of a Nazi officer. The excised text in <cite class="title italic">Tree of
                        Codes</cite> is a physical representation of this loss and the loss of much
                    of Schulz’s corpus during the war. The result is, as Foer describes it by
                    borrowing Schulz’s words, "a geometry of emptiness"
                    and a highly material — even sculptural — reading experience [<a class="ref" href="#schulz2008">Schulz 2008</a>, 65]. Foer has also said, in a publicity video
                    for his publisher, "I hope that <cite class="title italic">Tree of
                            Codes </cite>in some ways contributes to the conversation we are now
                        having about what’s possible with literature and what’s possible with
                        paper." This book presents an experience of remediation — of
                    representing one medium through another — in its production and printing. By
                    building on Jay David Bolter and Richard Grusin’s basic proposition that "remediation is a defining characteristic of the new digital
                        media" (45), I argue that <cite class="title italic">Tree of Codes</cite>
                    represents a version of Schulz’s story that helps to preserve and revive its
                    memory by paradoxically losing vast swaths of the text. Furthermore, Foer has
                    presented a printed object that offers a profound experience of loss and also
                    captures something of the history of literature that has been preserved from
                    WWII. In a 21<span class="hi superscript">st</span>-century publishing environment,
                    however, the possibilities of paper now comment on the experience of loss in
                    digital media. </div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p3">3</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p3"> Publishers have come to play an increasingly important role in the production of
                    such experimental literature, but this is a very old genre. Experimental
                    literary precedents have long drawn on a common thread of scientific and
                    methodological exploration of humanistic thought. In the words of Emile Zola,
                    perhaps the first commenter on the experimental novel, "The
                        idea of experiment carries with it the idea of modification. We start,
                        indeed, from the true facts, which are indestructible basis; but to show the
                        mechanism of these facts it is the genius in the book" (11). While
                    Zola is writing as a champion of the emergent 19th century naturalist school of
                    thought in French writing — which of course had its correlate in U.S. fiction
                    with authors like Theodore Dreiser, Frank Norris, Stephen Crane, and Upton
                    Sinclair — the American equivalent sought to challenge the deterministic impacts
                    of the scientific thought of psychology, evolution, and economics that fated the
                    livelihoods of so many Americans at the time. As a kind of extension of
                    scientific method, experimental literature must not confine itself, says Zola,
                        "to those lofty regions that lie beyond the boundaries
                        of science" (47). Instead, experimental literature tests the limits
                    of form and the mechanism of medium in an attempt to challenge the limits of
                    what can be known and said. Bruno Latour has been arguing for the use of
                    scientific experimentation in humanities discourses since at least the 1987
                    publication of <cite class="title italic">Science in Action</cite>, where he defined
                    experimentation as simply a scientific methodology to explore, test, and modify
                        "a core of common problems and methods" in
                    academic and scholarly knowledge creation (16). It is not until 1999, in <cite class="title italic">Pandora’s Hope, </cite>that Latour comes full circle and
                    claims that "an experiment is a story" (124). While
                    experimental texts have long challenged the norms of social and academic
                    discourse, experimental print literature has recently turned the locus of its
                    critique towards the limitations of digital publishing, while relishing the
                    materiality of paper. As a work of intermedia — between technologies and
                    discursive fields — the tools and critical tradition of the digital humanities
                    is perfectly suited to logically integrate experimental literature and analyze
                    broader shifts in medium and genre in the face of technological change;
                    prototyping becomes a way to link the means and methods of cultural inquiry as a
                    unified gesture.<a class="noteRef" href="#d3e277">[1]</a> As Alan Galey and Stan Ruecker describe in their essay
                        "How a Prototype Argues" (2010), the position of
                    this interpretive gesture exists somewhere within "the messy
                        middle ground between interpretation and making"
                    [<a class="ref" href="#galey2010">Galey and Ruecker 2010</a>, 406]. A prototype in a humanities context is a
                    generative and creative artifact that enacts a literary and critical gesture,
                    but a prototype is also a kind of scholarly outcome that must be experienced as
                    it performs a theory or argument alongside a discursive intervention. A critical
                    engagement with literature requires a creative act that seeks to bridge formal
                    constraints, but such a creative and critical gesture also offers the
                    opportunity to explore fundamentally paired themes within Foer’s text: the
                    fragility of human life and the fragility of print.</div>
               </div>
               <div class="div div0">
                  <h1 class="head">Lost on the Way</h1>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p4">4</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p4"> In a 2012 issue of <cite class="title italic">Digital Humanities Quarterly</cite>,
                    Paul Stephens marveled at the "extraordinary cornucopia of
                        recent avant-garde writing" (6). This comment arose from his
                    discussion on the recent "metadata revolution" that has
                    sought to catalogue and aggregate vast datasets into accessible archives that
                    are usable by contemporary authors for creative works (1). Foer’s text
                    represents a corollary gesture that Stephens identifies, but Foer takes Schulz’s
                        <cite class="title italic">The Street of Crocodiles</cite> as his sole archive.
                    While I have proposed that Foer’s text intentionally resists digitization in
                    response to our current digital context, the manufacture of <cite class="title italic">Tree of Codes </cite>suggests that this text must not be confused for
                    somehow resisting technology in general. The publisher of <cite class="title italic">Tree of Codes</cite>, Visual Editions, is a small boutique-like company
                    dedicated to experimental writing. The demands of the project required Visual
                    Editions to seek out a variety of highly technical processes from different
                    craftspeople and companies and a whole host of sophisticatedly engineered
                    manufacturing processes. So, while the pages were printed by the Belgian firm
                    die Keure — who were chosen because of their experience with printing art books
                    and custom government forms like voting ballots — the actual die-cutting was
                    done by Cachet in The Netherlands. Finally, the pages were returned to Belgium
                    for individual hand-finishing, only to return to The Netherlands to be bound
                    into a final product. Because of technical restrictions of a book that lacked so
                    much bulk, <cite class="title italic">Tree of Codes</cite> could not be released as a
                    hardcover. While at once forgoing the anachronistic tradition of releasing a
                    hardcover object that is associated with status, expense, and durability, the
                    intensive labour required to produce each book also makes for a quite expensive
                    paperback. My copy, on its initial release, cost $45.95 Canadian, before taxes.
                        <cite class="title italic">Tree of Codes </cite>implicitly raises questions about
                    the purpose of technology in the humanities and the production of literary art
                    through an implicit understanding of its manufacture. However, if it is possible
                    to suppose that technology is no mere means, humanities scholars must take
                    account of these implicit meanings of the tools used to analyze cultural
                    products of all kinds. </div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p5">5</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p5"> To accurately cite <cite class="title italic">Tree of Codes</cite> in ann online
                    journal, I have found it necessary to encode this complex text using HTML, CSS,
                    and an open source page turn script developed by Google. Therefore, digitizing
                    experimental literature becomes a prototyping framework for testing the
                    limitations of the presentation semantics of the web and the inherent meanings
                    held between print and digital versions. In the words of Geoffrey Rockwell and
                    Stéfan Sinclair in a draft essay by the same name,"There’s a
                        toy in my essay!" The "embedded hermeneutical toy"
                    in my essay "can be explored for technique," but I
                    believe that such an act of remediation is also an interpretive gesture that is
                    in sync with the thematics of loss within <cite class="title italic">Tree of Codes.
                    </cite>The markup I produce functions as an elaborate quotation mark that
                    attempts to describe the complex aesthetic experience of reading the material
                    text of <cite class="title italic">Tree of Codes</cite>; it has, I hope, as much to
                    say about digital humanities methods and experiments as it does about literary
                    analysis. However, between the limits of print and the limits of web-based
                    presentation, digital humanities discourse engages with certain
                    poststructuralist philosophies of language, text, and signification more
                    generally. Poststructuralism arose by questioning the assurances of meaning
                    associated with the Saussurean sign, and the poststructuralist conception of
                    language demands that the meaning of a text is also bound to its context and
                    must signify new meanings for new contexts. If digital texts are situated within
                    the context of markup languages, the shifting and reflowing contexts are
                    boundless in ways that theorists of the last century could not anticipate.
                    Jacques Derrida’s essay "Signature Event Context"
                    acts as something of an invitation to Galey and Ruecker’s prototyping theory and
                    methodology. During a colloquium on the theme of communication in 1971, Derrida
                    describes the philosophical basis of citation as follows: <blockquote>
                        <p>Every sign, linguistic or nonlinguistic, spoken or written (in the usual
                        sense of this opposition), as a small or large unity, can be
                            <em class="emph">cited</em>, put between quotation marks; thereby it can break
                        with every given context, and engender infinitely new contexts in an
                        absolutely nonsaturable fashion. This does not suppose that the mark is
                        valid outside its context, but on the contrary that there are only contexts
                        without any center of absolute anchoring. This citationality, duplication,
                        or duplicity, this iterability of the mark is not an accident or an anomaly,
                        but is that (normal/abnormal) without which a mark could no longer even have
                        a so-called "normal" functioning. What would a mark be
                        that one could not cite? And whose origin could not be lost on the way?
                            ("Signature" 320-321)</p>
                     </blockquote>
                  </div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p6">6</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p6">As a way of answering Derrida’s question, it is necessary to consider the
                    material context of the sign; the mark that cannot be cited is the mark that is
                    bound to its material support or substance. When a substance functions to
                    support the meaning of a text, the citation of printed marks now demands
                    supplementary markup. In other words, postmodern emphasis on iterability now
                    finds its full expression in the versioning logic of software developers and the
                    digitization efforts of digital humanists. By limiting his definition of
                    citation to only quotation marks, Derrida has limited the citationality of text
                    unnecessarily.</div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p7">7</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p7"> In what little critical attention Foer’s book has received, Katherine Hayles and
                    Kiene Brillenburg Wurth’s essays are good examples of the limits of citation.
                    Both authors are forced to cite the physical spaces in the text with slashes,
                    and cannot attempt to cite the layering and linking of meaning between pages.
                    Hayles attempts to cope with the problem with a system of angle brackets
                    intended to signal the relative depth of a word appearing through the holes in
                    the text (229). While Hayles offers an insightful statistical analysis of
                    relative word prevalence between the original story and Foer’s text, she
                    ultimately accepts "a limitation of digitization"
                    because Foer "predeformed his text, with the result that it
                        resists further deformation" (230). The language of deformation has
                    been used by many in digital humanities discourse, but I believe that the
                    language of supplementation is more representative of the critical and creative
                    acts of contemporary literature. Lisa Samuels and Jerome J. McGann’s essay,
                        "Deformance and Interpretation," served to found
                    this logic as a means of describing the performative aspects of an interpretive
                    method that sought to alter the original text. Samuels and McGann’s goal at that
                    time, in many respects, was to describe the necessity of altering a text to
                    archivists, whose very profession is defined by the act of preserving the
                    original. However, Stephen Ramsay inherits this language in <cite class="title italic">Reading Machines </cite>by describing how the "risks
                        of deformation" are inherent to all criticism, which equally risks
                    deforming meaning through critical rhetoric and argument. Ramsay settles on a
                    broader critical digital literacy that demands that digital humanists "contend not only with deformed texts, but with the 'how'
                        of those deformations" (63). As a final rejoinder to this tradition,
                    Alain Liu describes his "deformational forms" as
                    containing "something of the flavor of
                        deconstruction"
                    [<a class="ref" href="#liu2009">Liu 2009</a>, 505]. Because a digital version always modifies
                    the original, it must be understood as both a supplement to the paper text and a
                    new creation. If the purpose of a good citation honors the original in good
                    faith, it is incumbent upon those working in the humanities to simulate the
                    original context in every way possible, including the experience of variable and
                    uncertain meanings. The kind of versioning that I describe avoids the entropy of
                    deformation through a practice of making that is both technological and
                    creative. Between print and digital manifestations of Foer’s text, markup
                    functions as an elaborate, malleable, and generative language of citationality.
                    Markup is the performance of a quotation that leaves traces of code behind. </div>
               </div>
               <div class="div div0">
                  <h1 class="head">Conspiracy of Winking</h1>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p8">8</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p8">If Foer’s highly material text openly resists digital technology — though a
                        "tree of codes" at least obliquely references a tree-like
                    file system directory — what can possibly be learned by attempting to digitize
                    this print object? In the essay "Beyond Remediation"
                    (2009), by the Implementing New Knowledge Environments (INKE) group, a founding
                    premise of the project argues that the "relationship between
                        old and new media is reciprocal" (4). While Foer’s title suggests a
                    somewhat contradictory link between print and programming, I claim that any
                    difference between versions represents the traces of the print medium left
                    behind in the digital form. While there has been a sense that digital texts will
                    long be bookish in design, the reciprocal exchange between media necessitates
                    that print texts are capable of enacting digital characteristics. In the context
                    of the previous language of deformation, Foer’s supposed deformation of Schulz’s
                    novel would be further deformed in any critical discourse that struggles with
                    citation. My prototype, therefore, represents the attempt to push the limits of
                    what is condoned and possible with the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) schema
                    and what is supported by browsers as a generative process of supplementation.
                    Simply because a browser does not support a standard does not mean that a given
                    or aesthetic goal is invalid. The history of web standards has demonstrated how
                    tools, techniques, and capabilities that are implemented by developers and used
                    by the public become the norm. The acceptance of JavaScript is one such example
                    of usage dictating its acceptance as a standard. In the words of Douglas
                    Crockford in <cite class="title italic">JavaScript: The Good Parts</cite>, "JavaScript’s popularity is almost completely independent of
                        its qualities as a programming language" (1.0) and still owes a great
                    deal to its adoption by Netscape Navigator 2 in 1996. Furthermore, artistic and
                    creative endeavors are always pressing against the norms of presentation, and
                    web development must follow a similar path. This kind of methodology demands
                    that a new version of a text, even a version that loses so much tactile meaning
                    through digitization, leaves behind traces of readerly intention and more
                    critical possibilities. Presentation semantics of the web are simply more strict
                    and documented than the cultural norms of print in previous periods. I can only
                    describe the instances of reading through the text by flipping pages but also by
                    catching glimpses and sidelong glances of different pages. The interplay between
                    text and object is lost each time it is read because the experience of reading
                    the print version cannot, by and large, not be repeated, while the imagistic
                    language in Schulz’s original story appears and overlaps in confusing and
                    sensuous ways. Foer’s text echoes this rush of imagery through its form; pages
                    slide into view unexpectedly and reappear in new contexts again and again.</div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p9">9</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p9"> I have found that the whisper is the most salient metaphor to describe the
                    experience of reading this book. <cite class="title italic">Tree of Codes </cite>asks
                    readers to relinquish the strictly conservative — in terms of the preservation
                    function — value of a text as an unchanging entity. While it is safe to assume
                    that the meaning of any text will change as the readers change, <cite class="title italic">Tree of Codes</cite> goes further by asking that readers
                    renew their experience of the novel through a varied attention to these visual
                    whispers. The reader of <cite class="title italic">Tree of Codes</cite>is complicit
                    in Foer’s rewriting of <cite class="title italic">The Street of Crocodiles.
                    </cite>One passage on a single page reads as follows: "the
                        room grew enormous / filled with / whispers, / a conspiracy of / winking /
                        eyes / opening up among the flowers on the wall / ." (<cite class="title italic">Tree </cite>27). Reading a single page and ignoring the pages
                    beneath produces a coherent sentence, but the text begs our eyes to wander. The
                    underlying text whispers from within the book as our eyes move over the page.
                    The "conspiracy of winking" generates a new text, with
                    gradients of emphasis that are unique to each reader. This same page may also be
                    read, "Then / anger, choking / the room grew enormous / he
                        would fall / into / , filled with / whispers / transformed / beyond / his
                        thoughts / a conspiracy of / a storm of sobs / grown unfamiliar winking / He
                        would /eyes / his breath and listen / opening up / among the flowers on the
                        wall / ." (27).<a class="noteRef" href="#d3e452">[2]</a> Some decisions are made consciously
                    and some are unintended slips of the eye. Words are completed by the reader and
                    grammatical correctness is made out of necessity and habit. <cite class="title italic">Tree of Codes </cite>has many of the hallmarks of newer web-based media,
                    but this text is constantly shifting despite its decidedly static print form.
                    The discrepancies between the inline citation above and the <a class="ref"
                        href="./resources/source/treeofcodes.html"
                        onclick="window.open('./resources/source/treeofcodes.html'); return false">HTML prototype</a> I have
                        built<a class="noteRef" href="#d3e470">[3]</a> are
                    profound and drastically shape the meaning of the text and the context of my
                    interpretations.</div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p10">10</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p10"> This prototype simultaneously makes arguments about the limitations of the
                    browser and the limits of text to be digitized. Such an argument follows closely
                    from Galey’s claim about "the web browser as a vital yet
                        unacknowledged agent in the sociology of texts in the present"
                    [<a class="ref" href="#galey2011">Galey 2011</a>, 197]. The experience of this discrepancy offers
                    insight into several issues for digital humanists. The basic languages of the
                    web — HTML, CSS, and JavaScript — are all highly accessible and offer a promise
                    of backward compatibility and format longevity for humanities projects. While
                    the browser is far from a transparent rendering of web content, the first web
                    pages at CERN developed by Tim Berners-Lee in 1992 are still readable by modern
                    browsers (see <a class="ref"
                        href="http://info.cern.ch/hypertext/WWW/TheProject.html"
                        onclick="window.open('http://info.cern.ch/hypertext/WWW/TheProject.html'); return false">http://info.cern.ch/hypertext/WWW/TheProject.html</a>). So, despite being
                    excellent at rendering text, modern browsers each have an individual bias
                    towards experimental code, and render the W3C standards with varying success and
                    clarity. In addition to the legal limitations of copyright and contemporary
                    literature, this digital prototype of <cite class="title italic">Tree of Codes</cite>
                    represents an opening of academic discourse to a global conversation on the
                    capabilities of the web. However, as the relatively new HTML5 and CSS3 schema is
                    implemented across browsers, support for certain features approved by the W3C
                    remains spotty and uneven. In the implementation of a mix of CSS keyframe
                    animations and JavaScript page turns, the current support for animations and 3D
                    transforms represents a great deal of variability across browsers. Additionally,
                    there were several changes in browser rendering engines during the development
                    of this prototype. Notably, Google announced on April 3, 2013 that the Chrome
                    browser would be forking the Webkit rendering engine and producing their own
                    version called Blink, which they have been working on since 2007 under the title
                    Webcore. Shortly before Google’s announcement, the Norwegian-based Opera browser
                    made an announcement of their own and committed their change from the Presto
                    rendering engine to Google’s development trajectory. While this shift has the
                    potential to further divide browser performance, it is important to remember
                    that the open source Webkit project — initiated by Apple in 1998 — is not a
                    wholly unified project. The Chrome and Safari implementations of Webkit have
                    long differed in their respective V8 and Nitro JavaScript engines. An early
                    prototype using keyframe animations was unsuitable because of how differently
                    each browser rendered 3D transforms, and the book opening ultimately needed to
                    be animated with the Transit JQuery library (<a class="ref"
                        href="http://ricostacruz.com/jquery.transit/"
                        onclick="window.open('http://ricostacruz.com/jquery.transit/'); return false">
                        http://ricostacruz.com/jquery.transit/</a>). As open source
                    implementations of Webkit continue to fork and diverge from the original source
                    code, the aesthetics of the web will undoubtedly remain heterogeneous. In short,
                    the culture of experimental presentation and endless versioning is built into
                    the very fabric of the web. </div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p11">11</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p11"> Due to this variability, digitizing Foer’s text for the purposes of citation or
                    distribution requires an acceptance that such an intermedial versioning will
                    generate errors, gaps, and an experience of loss. Because any reproduction must
                    fall within the auspices of academic fair use and not violate the terms of
                    Foer’s copyright, this task represents a departure from many digital humanities
                    prototyping or archiving activities. Perhaps more significantly, Foer’s text
                    fulfills the theory and practice of Zola’s description of experimental
                    literature as the performance of modification. The experimental text, Zola
                    insists, must "show the mechanism" of its manufacture
                    to modify the seeming stability of the form. This formal modification is not a
                    passive lens through which one language or mode of communication is interpreted.
                    It is a supplementary text that negotiates between media contexts. For example,
                    the "find" function that allows users to search for words within a single
                    page becomes a powerful tool to read <em class="emph">through</em> this prototype.
                    Because all modern browsers have this functionality, it is possible to drill
                    through a text and mine for word frequency and position. Searching for
                        "father" reveals eight instances of the word and are numerically
                    significant given the small sample size, but their placement in three dimensions
                    allows readers to assess the physical structure of text in addition to
                    iteration.</div>
               </div>
               <div class="div div0">
                  <h1 class="head">A Deeply Humanistic Way of Knowing</h1>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p12">12</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p12"> Due to the experiential nature of using a prototype to explore a text,
                    unanticipated results can lurk within the code and are often exposed only by
                    making and using the digital version. There is a tension between the
                    experiential discovery of making and prototyping and forms of large scale text
                    analysis. In the context of Ramsay’s "algorithmic
                        analysis" and Franco Moretti’s "distant
                        reading," the digital humanities offers a promise to lessen the labor
                    of humanistic inquiry and distance the human reader from the initial experience
                    of the text. Michael Witmore first made the connection between this aim and
                    certain strains of philosophy in a blog post. The so-called speculative realists
                    — led by Alan Badiou, Quentin Meillassoux, and Graham Harman — have found that
                    the absolute meaning and clarity afforded by the analytic tools of mathematics
                    and computer science has produced a viable alternative to a metaphysics
                    predicated on a correlation between language, thinking, and being. This brand of
                    realist philosophy draws its inspiration in part from a long tradition of
                    experimental literature that identifies the tension between the literary
                    experience and generalizing literary meaning through number. In <cite class="title italic">The Number and the Siren </cite>(2012), Meillassoux works to
                        "bring to light a procedure of
                        <em class="emph">encryption</em>" housed within Stéphane Mallarmé’s <cite class="title italic">Coup de dés </cite>(3). This is a text, Meillassoux claims,
                    that can and must be read algorithmically. The text’s procedure, once
                    deciphered, allows the precise determination of the "'unique Number' enigmatically evoked in the poem" (3). By
                    contrast, the individual experience of the direction and production of light
                    offers a significant change in the meaning of <cite class="title italic">Tree of
                        Codes</cite>. In Foer’s print version, the text has shadows and gradients
                    of light and visibility — and therefore intelligibility — that the digital
                    version does not quite simulate. The screen itself is the source of light and
                    the "shadows" are a product of the linear-gradient function.
                    It is the interaction design — or even the highly constructed user experience of
                    the paper book — that allows for leaps in logic and meaning to be read — quite
                    literally — <em class="emph">through</em> the work. Mallarmé’s <cite class="title italic">Un
                        Coup de Des</cite> (1914) is, of course, a direct precedent for this
                    blocking of text that is set in a visual and spacial array, but Foer’s text
                    resists algorithmic analysis despite their formal similarities. Visual or
                    aesthetic similarity does not always guarantee similar meaning. So, while
                    Mallarmé’s poem differs greatly from <cite class="title italic">Tree of Codes</cite>,
                    Foer’s rewriting of Schulz through a process of redaction has been taken up more
                    recently in Michalais Pichler’s version of <cite class="title italic">Un Coup de Des
                    </cite>(2008). In this formal gesture of emptying out the text, he rewrote the
                    original text by masking the text in a constellation of black bars. As a visual
                    statement about omission and the chance erasure of texts — whether they are
                    incriminating official documents or poetry — reworking and often annihilating
                    past texts in this way makes comments on the state of the historical record and
                    memory in general. So, while Meillassoux celebrates the loss of human experience
                    even as Pichler and Foer demand it, the loss of our direct experience of a text
                    represents a powerful new motif within 21st century experimental literature.</div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p13">13</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p13"> Through a kind of tactile encryption that resists algorithmic methods, Foer’s
                    novel echoes the linking and layering of digital texts and becomes a kind of
                    paper correlate of hypertextuality. I find it surprising, therefore, when
                    literary journalists cast <cite class="title italic">Tree of Codes </cite>as an
                        "object of anti-technology"
                    [<a class="ref" href="#kachka2010">Kachka 2010</a>]. In a <cite class="title italic">New York Magazine</cite>
                    interview, Foer put the issue of physicality like this: "It’s a way of remembering something about books," he says. "I think there’s going to be something that happens now, where
                        books move in two directions, one toward digitized formats and one toward
                        remembering what’s nice about the physicality of them"
                    [<a class="ref" href="#kachka2010">Kachka 2010</a>]. In an earlier <cite class="title italic">Vanity
                        Fair</cite> interview held with Heather Wagner, Foer describes the early
                    inception of the novel by saying, "I started thinking about
                        what books look like, what they will look like, how the form of the book is
                        changing very quickly. If we don’t give it a lot of thought, it won’t be for
                        the better. There is an alternative to e-books. And I just love the
                        physicality of books. I love breaking the spine, smelling the pages, taking
                        it into the bath. . ."
                    [<a class="ref" href="#wagner2010">Wagner 2010</a>]. Later in the interview with Wagner, Foer is sure to
                    say that he is no iconoclast and does not want to be perceived as rejecting the
                    digitization of literature. Instead, he describes his motivations by saying,
                        "I love the notion that 'this is a book that remembers
                            it has a body.' When a book remembers, we remember. It reminds you
                        that you have a body. So many of the things we may think of as burdensome
                        are actually the things that make us more human"
                    [<a class="ref" href="#wagner2010">Wagner 2010</a>]. Foer continues his use of the metaphor of the
                    embodied text in a <cite class="title italic">New York Times</cite> interview with
                    Steven Heller when he says, "On the brink of the end of
                        paper, I was attracted to the idea of a book that can’t forget it has a
                        body"
                    [<a class="ref" href="#heller2010">Heller 2010</a>]. The book, for Foer, has an important historical
                    function that digital technologies have difficulty simulating. There is no
                    digital metaphor for smell. They cannot simulate wear and tear. How do you water
                    stain an iPad without voiding its warranty? They do not collect marginal
                    comments, pressed flowers, or old train tickets. Indeed, the closest analogy
                    print has for deleting an ebook is to burn it. While Foer’s thoughts on the
                    status of the printed codex betray his paper bias, his thinking about print has
                    become saturated in a reaction to digital media. His concern for print books is
                    fundamentally inflected by digital culture, and his resistance to digital media
                    has become a reciprocal exchange. </div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p14">14</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p14"> This reciprocal relationship is also shaping common conceptions of history and
                    memory. In the drive to digitize and archive paper texts for the purposes of
                    faster access and safe storage, it is also becoming increasingly difficult to
                    forget or lose digital footprints and works of literature alike. With the
                    degradation of electronic files through bit-rot notwithstanding, <cite class="title italic">Tree of Codes </cite> implicitly argues that loss has meaning
                    that is valuable and is a crucial aspect of human life; the loss that is
                    experienced through any digitization attempt is a means of accessing this type
                    of meaning. In the words of Matthew Kirschenbaum in <cite class="title italic">Mechanisms </cite>(2008), "Versions are the textual
                        differences that make a difference" (188). By borrowing the language
                    of programming tools, versioned code makes for easier debugging and helps
                    facilitate backup throughout the development process. Comparing versions between
                    media is a fundamental function of the digital humanities’ ethos of thinking
                    through making. However, versioning was designed precisely to have a perfect
                    record of code development. Therefore, by following Kirschenbaum’s play on the
                    word, there is a paradox within the heart of digital humanities methodology.
                    Creating a digital version preserves documents while also resulting in a loss of
                    certain kinds of medium specific meaning. <cite class="title italic">Tree of
                        Codes</cite> offers an experience of versioning loss. It is an experimental
                    text that demands an experimental methodology, and it is a material text that
                    gestures to the digital in a way that offers an experience of loss at the heart
                    of the story. The text implicitly asks its readers to consider meaning when
                    meaning is lost. In an era when digital footprints are becoming more and more
                    indelible, <cite class="title italic">Tree of Codes</cite> recalls the loss of life
                    and loss of meaning during WWII to make meaning in the 21<span class="hi superscript">st</span>-century digital world. Viktor Mayer-Schönberger has argued recently
                    that digital memory requires expiration dates to mimic the norms of human
                    experience while also equalizing the "stark imbalances of
                        information power" (202). In other words, deleting data must become
                    meaningful and valuable. He ominously turns to the "tragic
                        case" of the Dutch registry of citizens used by Nazi forces to
                    conduct their genocide as a historical example. The history of the Holocaust and
                    of the Jewish diaspora is never far from Foer’s writing. In the context of
                    Schulz’s life and the precarious position of his oeuvre as it emerged from
                    post-war Europe, his books come to embody the fragility of paper in Foer’s
                    hands. </div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p15">15</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p15"> The nuance and detail demanded of any reading of <cite class="title italic">Tree of
                        Codes</cite>must be situated within the history and life of Schulz. In the
                    afterword to <cite class="title italic">Tree of Codes</cite>, Foer supplies his
                    readers with an account of Schulz’s death: "Felix Landau, a
                        Gestapo officer in charge of the Jewish labor force in Drohobycz, became
                        aware of Schulz’s talents as a draughtsman, and directed Schulz to paint
                        murals on the walls of his child’s playroom" (138). Though kept like
                    something of a pet, Landau was only able to save Schulz’s life until November,
                    1942. Schulz had obtained falsified papers and was planning to escape, when a
                    Gestapo sergeant named Karl Günter decided take revenge for Landau’s earlier
                    murder of his Jewish dentist. The common account, which Foer relates in his
                    afterword, is that Günter told Landau, "You killed my Jew.
                        Now I’ve killed yours" (138). All that remains of Schulz’s reportedly
                    great artistic output of stories and drawings can be assembled into a single
                    volume. The two surviving short story collections, <cite class="title italic">The
                        Street of Crocodiles </cite>and <cite class="title italic">Sanatorium Under the
                        Sign of the Hourglass,</cite> are all that remain of his writing, despite
                    having entrusted a single copy of a larger manuscript entitled simply <cite class="title italic">Messiah </cite>to non-Jewish friends. This manuscript remains
                    lost to history. Yet, this profoundly affecting story is not entirely settled.
                    In the wake of the war, historians were eager to claim great artists and tragic
                    figures as part of a coherent narrative of antisemitism and a unified Jewish
                    identity to justify the establishment of Israel. Brian R. Banks describes the
                    conflicted claims placed upon Schulz’s ethnic, religious, and racial identities
                    in this fraught political arena: "Yes he was of Jewish blood
                        but also an aggregate of Polish blood (significantly he sought to flee west
                        not to east at the end) and also Drohobycz blood (which he could not flee)
                        in the sense of being the landscape of his life, merged with a profoundly
                        artistic spirit that does not necessarily exclude forms of personal faith
                        borne out by the scattered scriptural metaphors" (257). Banks argues
                    that Schulz’s national and religious identity was so locally situated that he
                    could hardly stand in for these global events. Indeed, Banks goes so far as to
                    claim that Schulz was not even killed primarily because of his ethnicity but
                        "due to a personal rivalry between murderers who enjoyed
                        legitimacy for their barbarism" (258). The casualness of his murder
                    emphasizes the profound sense of loss throughout <cite class="title italic">Tree of
                        Codes,</cite> but this casualness also demands a certain fastidiousness or
                    attention to detail in Schulz’s memory. Recently, however, the murals painted in
                    Schulz’s distinctive style were retrieved from the original cottage in which
                    they were painted for Landau and his children, but an Israeli documentary film
                    team had taken them to Israel with a great deal of controversy in 2001. They
                    were exhibited in Jerusalem’s Yad Vashem Holocaust Museum in 2009 despite Polish
                    protests (Bronner). Repatriating these works to unify the history of the
                    Holocaust demands a critical attention to context and a kind of citationality
                    that finds these works in a radically different context from which they were
                    originally conceived. </div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p16">16</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p16"> The fragility of his life and the fragility of his literature is a testament to
                    the problems of ever maintaining an accurate historical record and the
                    provisional nature of any text. And yet, it is literature and the book that
                    functions as an imaginative canvas against which the very definition of literary
                    art and literary history is expressed. For example, the story that opens
                    Schulz’s <cite class="title italic">Sanatorium </cite>collection is entitled simply
                        "The Book" and relishes the childish wonder of
                    reading. In the story, the book is a near magical object: <blockquote>
                        <p>
                        the wind would rustle through its pages and the pictures would rise. And as
                        the windswept pages were turned, merging the colors and shapes, a shiver ran
                        through the columns of text, freeing from among the letters flocks of
                        swallows and larks. Page after page floated in the air and gently saturated
                        the landscape with brightness. At other times, The Book lay still and the
                        wind opened it softly like a huge cabbage rose; the petals, one by one,
                        eyelid under eyelid, all blind, velvety, and dreamy, slowly disclosed a blue
                        pupil, a colored peacock’s heart or a chattering nest of hummingbirds.
                        (Schulz 116)</p>
                     </blockquote> He has often been called the Polish Kafka, but
                    comparisons to Borges are equally appropriate. Schulz's vision of the book of
                    life — or a living book — shares similarities to Borges's "Library of Babel" or "Tlön, Uqbar, Orbis
                        Tertus." In such a context, it is not unreasonable for <cite class="title italic">The Street of Crocodiles</cite> to metamorphose through the
                    wear and tear of time and the unforeseen losses of history into <cite class="title italic">Tree of Codes.</cite> For Schulz and Foer, the form of the
                    book is the very source of imagination that springs from the pages of literary
                    art. The book is both animate and inanimate, alive and also skirting with
                    oblivion. </div>
                  <div class="counter">
                     <a href="#p17">17</a>
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p17">While these existential metaphors of literature and life are also at home in the
                    new forms of natively digital literature and the aesthetics of the web, it
                    remains important to maintain that such motifs continue to draw a tradition from
                    the book. Beyond any one sided appeal by designers and developers to reshape
                    reading, the artistic and historical foundations of literature’s place in
                    expressing something inherently human remain. Foer gestures towards our bookish
                    past when he says, "we / find ourselves / part of the / tree
                        / of / cod / es /. Reality is as thin as paper / . / only a small section /
                        immediately before us / is / able / to endure" (92-3). What is lost
                    in such a citation? If the relationship between old and new media is reciprocal,
                    the meaning of such an imperfect citation turns doubly through valences of
                    experimentation and authority. A Polish author, lost during the horrors of WWII
                    and translated into English, has continued to make meaning by physically
                    removing his words. The text continues to be cited and versioned again and
                    again. The original text moves further from its original context, but it
                    continues to speak to the theme of loss through a process of citing, versioning,
                    digitizing, prototyping, and making. Like Schulz’s surviving texts and images,
                    the preservation of this material history defines the enormity of the challenge
                    facing digital technology as a historical medium. Jerome McGann’s reminder, in
                        <cite class="title italic">Radiant Textuality</cite> (2004), that "the literature we inherit (to this date) is and will always be
                        bookish" may be inverted to accept the possibility that print
                    publishing will become — in some respects — digital (168). If experimental
                    fiction can be a useful yardstick to measure digital humanities scholarship and
                    model new types of digital texts, these new print prototypes, like <cite class="title italic">Tree of Codes,</cite> are less about resisting digital
                    technology and more about pushing digital technology further with lessons from
                    the past. As Elizabeth Eisenstein’s vision of print history argues, the printing
                    press has long been an agent of social and political change, but it is also
                    becoming a tool of technological critique. As a prototype of the possibilities
                    of print, <cite class="title italic">Tree of Codes </cite>is a reminder that digital
                    publishing platforms must find a way to incorporate the historical and formally
                    creative functions of literature. If an experimental remediation from one medium
                    to another represents the history and experience of loss, the methodology of
                    thinking through making may have found its ethical purpose. The loss of meaning
                    through digitization may simply represent an extension of a long tradition of,
                    in Kirschenbaum’s words, "a deeply humanistic way of
                        knowing" (23).</div>
               </div>
        
        
            

        
            </div>
            <div id="notes">
               <h2>Notes</h2>
               <div class="endnote" id="d3e277">
                  <span class="noteRef">[1]</span> Despite their seeming equivalence, the terms intermedia
                        and transmedia require some differentiation and are useful to sequester
                        certain valences of meaning that do not apply to my argument. Intermedia has
                        its roots within modern multimedia artists interested in transgressing
                        typical discursive norms of art and classical formal restrictions. Collage,
                        photography, and sculpture were mixed as a means of blurring the conventions
                        of 2D and 3D art. In the transition from drawing to sculpture, the norms of
                        the artistic establishment were undermined but a range of expressive
                        possibilities were also made possible. Transmedia has recently been used by
                        Henry Jenkins to describe a cross marketing opportunity between literature,
                        film, and various levels of consumer goods like toys, games, and immersive
                        experiences such as theme parks to maximize the profit gained from a single
                        story or character. We often experience this so-called "transmedia
                            storytelling" through the marketing and franchising of mass
                        media. Therefore, my study has more in common with the intermedia movement
                        made popular by Dick Higgins in the 60s. Klaus-Peter Busse defines
                        intermedia as that which "presents itself in multiple
                            ways, as the transgression of the limits of artistic expression, an
                            artistic exploration of medial potentials, and medial space for
                            trans-disciplinary work with potentially all media" (264). In
                        this context, a version of intermedia practice exists in the process of
                        digitization.</div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d3e452">
                  <span class="noteRef">[2]</span> Incidentally, Hayles’ notation style using
                        angle brackets to indicate the depth of pages is interesting to implement in
                        this instance. The word "Then" appears deeper in the text and thereby
                        breaks the assumption that any given sentence can be read from left to right
                        of a single page or higher or lower order pages. However, to cite the
                        remainder of the sentence, such a notation style would look like this:
                            "&lt;Then&gt;&lt;&lt;anger, choking&gt;&gt;the room
                            grew enormous&lt;he would fall&gt;&lt;into&gt;, filled with
                            whispers,&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;transformed&gt;&gt;&gt;&gt;&gt;&gt;&gt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;beyond&gt;&gt;&gt;&gt;&gt;&gt;&gt;&lt;his
                            thoughts&gt;a conspiracy of&lt;&lt;&lt;storm of
                            sobs&gt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;grown unfamiliar&gt;&gt;winking&lt;he
                            would&gt;eyes&lt;his breath and listen&gt;opening up among the flowers
                            on the wall."
                        [<a class="ref" href="#foer2010">Foer 2010</a>, 27–37]). While such a citation style does
                        well to emphasize the text that is at a greater depth, it privileges the
                        deeper words without giving a sense of how the individual tabs are placed on
                        the page. Indeed, this citation ignores the X and Y axis to give a sense of
                        the movement through the Z axis.</div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d3e470">
                  <span class="noteRef">[3]</span>The prototype can also be viewed at the following url: <a class="ref"
                     href="http://www.aaronmauro.com/treeofcodes/treeofcodes.html"
                     onclick="window.open('http://www.aaronmauro.com/treeofcodes/treeofcodes.html'); return false">
                            http://www.aaronmauro.com/treeofcodes/treeofcodes.html</a>.</div>
            </div>
            <div id="worksCited">
               <h2>Works Cited</h2>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="banks2006"><!-- close -->Banks 2006</span>  Banks, Brian R. <cite class="title italic">Muse and &amp; Messiah: The Life, Imagination, and Legacy of Bruno Schulz
                        (1892-1942). </cite> London: InkerMen, 2006. Print. </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="barry2012"><!-- close -->Berry 2012</span>  Berry, David M. "Understanding the Digital Humanities."
                    <cite class="title italic">Understanding the Digital Humanities. </cite> New York:
                    Palgrave, 2012. Print.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="bolter2000"><!-- close -->Bolter and Gruisin 2000</span>  Bolter, Jay David and
                    Richard Grusin. <cite class="title italic">Remediation: Understanding New Media.
                    </cite>Cambridge: MIT, 2000. Print. </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="box1987"><!-- close -->Box and Draper 1987</span>  Box, George E.P. and Norman R.
                    Draper. <cite class="title italic">Empirical Model-Building and Response
                        Surfaces.</cite> New York: Wiley, 1987. Print. </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="brillenburg2012"><!-- close -->Brillenburg Wurth                     2011</span> Brillenburg Wurth, Kiene. "Old and New Medialities in
                        Foer’s <cite class="title italic">Tree of Codes.</cite>"
                    <cite class="title italic">CLCWeb: Comparative Literature and Culture</cite> 13.3
                    (2011): &lt;<a class="ref"
                     href="http://dx.doi.org/10.7771/1481-4374.1800"
                     onclick="window.open('http://dx.doi.org/10.7771/1481-4374.1800'); return false">http://dx.doi.org/10.7771/1481-4374.1800</a>&gt;</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="bronner2009"><!-- close -->Bronner 2009</span> Bronner, Ethan. "Behind Fairy Tale Drawings, Walls Talk of Unspeakable Cruelty."
                    <cite class="title italic">New York Times</cite> February 28, 2009. Web 8 Feb 2012.
                        &lt;<a class="ref"
                     href="http://www.nytimes.com/2009/02/28/arts/design/28wall.html?pagewanted=print"
                     onclick="window.open('http://www.nytimes.com/2009/02/28/arts/design/28wall.html?pagewanted=print'); return false">http://www.nytimes.com/2009/02/28/arts/design/28wall.html?pagewanted=print
                    </a>
               </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="busse2005"><!-- close -->Busse 2005</span>  Busse, Klaus-Peter. "Intermedia: The Aesthetic Experience of Cultural
                        Interpsaces."
                    <cite class="title italic"> Intermedia: Enacting the Liminal.</cite> Eds. Hans Breder
                    and Klaus-Peter Busse. Dortmunder: Schriften Zur Kunst, 2005. 262-270. Print. </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="crockford2008"><!-- close -->Crockford 2008</span>  Crockford, Douglas. <cite class="title italic">JavaScript: The Good Parts.</cite> O’Reilly. 2008. EPUB. </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="drucker2004"><!-- close -->Drucker 2004</span>  Drucker, Johanna. <cite class="title italic">The Century of Artists’ Books.</cite> New York: Granary
                    Books, 2004. Print. </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="eisenstein1979"><!-- close -->Eisenstein 1979</span> Eisenstein, Elizabeth L.
                        <cite class="title italic">The Printing Press as an Agent of Change:
                        Communications and Cultural Transformations in Early-Modern Europe</cite>.
                    New York: Cambridge UP, 1979. Print.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="foer2010"><!-- close -->Foer 2010</span>  Foer, Jonathan Safran. <cite class="title italic">Tree of Codes.</cite> London: Visual Editions, 2010. Print. </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="galey2009"><!-- close -->Galey 2009</span>  Galey et al. "Beyond Remediation: The Role of Textual Studies in Implementing New
                        Knowledge Environments". <cite class="title italic">New Knowledge
                        Environments </cite>1.1 (2009) OJS. Web 8 Feb 2012. &lt;<a class="ref"
                     href="http://journals.uvic.ca/index.php/INKE/article/view/167"
                     onclick="window.open('http://journals.uvic.ca/index.php/INKE/article/view/167'); return false">http://journals.uvic.ca/index.php/INKE/article/view/167</a>.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="galey2011"><!-- close -->Galey 2011</span>  Galey, Alan. "Reading the Book of Mozilla: Web Browsers and the Materiality of Digital
                        Texts."
                    <cite class="title italic">The History of Reading, Volume 3: Methods, Strategies,
                        Tactics</cite>. Eds. Rosalind Crone and Shafquat Towheed. London: Palgrave,
                    196-214. Print. 2011</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="galey2010"><!-- close -->Galey and Ruecker 2010</span>  Galey, Alan and Stan
                    Ruecker. "How a Prototype Argues."
                    <cite class="title italic">Literary and Linguistic Computing </cite> 25.4 (October
                    2010): 405-424. Print.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="heller2010"><!-- close -->Heller 2010</span>  Heller, Steven. "Jonathan Safran Foer’s Book as Art Object."
                    <cite class="title italic">New York Times</cite> 24 Nov 2010. Web. 8 Feb 2012. &lt;
                        <a class="ref"
                     href="http://artsbeat.blogs.nytimes.com/2010/11/24/jonathan-safran-foers-book-as-art-object"
                     onclick="window.open('http://artsbeat.blogs.nytimes.com/2010/11/24/jonathan-safran-foers-book-as-art-object'); return false">http://artsbeat.blogs.nytimes.com/2010/11/24/jonathan-safran-foers-book-as-art-object/</a>
               </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="jenkins2003"><!-- close -->Jenkins 2003</span>  Jenkins, Henry. "Transmedia Storytelling: Moving characters from books to films
                        to video games can make them stronger and more compelling."
                    <cite class="title italic">MIT Technology Review.</cite> Web. 15th Jan 2003. &lt;<a class="ref"
                     href="http://www.technologyreview.com/news/401760/transmedia-storytelling/"
                     onclick="window.open('http://www.technologyreview.com/news/401760/transmedia-storytelling/'); return false"> http://www.technologyreview.com/news/401760/transmedia-
                        storytelling/</a>
               </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="kachka2010"><!-- close -->Kachka 2010</span>  Kachka, Boris. "Reinventing the Book: Jonathan Safran Foer’s Object of
                        Anti-Technology."
                    <cite class="title italic">New York Magazine.</cite> 21 Nov 2010. Web. 8 Feb 2012.
                        <a class="ref"
                     href="http://nymag.com/arts/books/features/69635/"
                     onclick="window.open('http://nymag.com/arts/books/features/69635/'); return false">
                        http://nymag.com/arts/books/features/69635/</a>
               </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="liu2009"><!-- close -->Liu 2009</span>  Liu, Alan. "The End of
                        the End of the Book: Dead Books, Lively Margins, and Social
                        Computing."
                    <cite class="title italic">Michigan Quarterly Review</cite> 48.4 (2009): 499–520.
                    Print.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="mcgann2001"><!-- close -->McGann 2001</span>  McGann, Jerome. <cite class="title italic">Radiant Textuality: Literature After the World Wide Web</cite>. New York:
                    Palgrave, 2001. Print.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="meillassoux2012"><!-- close -->Meillassoux                     2012</span> Meillassoux, Quentin. <cite class="title italic">The Number and the Siren: A
                        Decipherment of Mallarmét’s Coup de Dés. </cite>Trans. Robin MacKay. United
                    Kingdom: Urbanomic, 2012. Print.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="meillassoux2008"><!-- close -->Meillassoux 2008</span>  Meillassoux Quentin. <cite class="title italic">After Finitude: An Essay on the Necessity of Contingency. t
                    </cite>Trans. Ray Brassier. London: Continuum, 2008. Print. </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="moretti2000"><!-- close -->Moretti, 2000</span>  Moretti, Franco. "Conjectures on World Literature."
                    <cite class="title italic">New Left Review</cite> 1 (Jan./Feb. 2000): 54-68. Web. 30
                    July 2013.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="ramsay2011"><!-- close -->Ramsay 2011</span>  Ramsay, Stephen. <cite class="title italic">Reading Machines: Toward an Algorithmic Criticism</cite>. Urbana: U of
                    Illinois P, 2011. Print.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="rockwell2013"><!-- close -->Rockwell and Sinclair 2013</span>  Rockwell, Geoffrey
                    and Stéfan Sinclair. "There’s a Toy in My Essay: Problems
                        with the Rhetoric of Text Analysis (Draft of Chapter of
                        Heremeneuti.ca)."” Web. 18 Feb. 2013. <a class="ref"
                     href="http://www.philosophi.ca/pmwiki.php/Main/TheRhetoricOfTextAnalysis"
                     onclick="window.open('http://www.philosophi.ca/pmwiki.php/Main/TheRhetoricOfTextAnalysis'); return false">
                        http://www.philosophi.ca/pmwiki.php/Main/TheRhetoricOfTextAnalysis</a>
               </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="samuels1999"><!-- close -->Samuels and McGann 1999</span> Samuels, Lisa and Jerome
                    J. McGann"Deformance and Interpretation."
                    <cite class="title italic">New Literary History</cite> 30 (Winter, 1999): 25–56.
                    JSTOR. 18 Feb. 2013.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="schulz2008"><!-- close -->Schulz 2008</span> Schulz Bruno. <cite class="title italic">The
                        Street of Crocodiles and Other Stories</cite>. Trans. Celina Wieniewska.
                    New York: Penquin, 2008. Print.</div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="wagner2010"><!-- close -->Wagner 2010</span>  Wagner, Heather. "Jonathan Safran Foer Talks Tree of Codes and Conceptual Art."
                    <span class="hi italic">Vanity Fair</span>. 10 Nov 2010. Web. 8 Feb 2012. <a class="ref"
                     href="http://www.vanityfair.com/online/daily/2010/11/jonathan-safran-foer-talks-tree-of-codes-and-paper-art"
                     onclick="window.open('http://www.vanityfair.com/online/daily/2010/11/jonathan-safran-foer-talks-tree-of-codes-and-paper-art'); return false">http://www.vanityfair.com/online/daily/
                        2010/11/jonathan-safran-foer-talks-tree-of-codes-and-paper-art.print</a>
               </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="witmore2012"><!-- close -->Witmore 2012</span>  Witmore, Michael. "The Ancestral Text."
                    <cite class="title italic">Debates in the Digital Humanities. </cite>Ed. Matthew K.
                    Gold. Minneapolis: U Minnesota P, 2012. Print. </div>
               <div class="bibl">
                  <span class="ref" id="wurth2011"><!-- close -->Wurth 2011</span> Wurth, Kiene Brillenburg "Old and New Medialities in Foer’s <cite class="title italic">Tree of
                            Codes</cite>."
                    <cite class="title italic">CLCWeb</cite> 13.3 (2011). Web. 8 Feb 2012. <a class="ref"
                     href="http://docs.lib.purdue.edu/clcweb/vol13/iss3/14"
                     onclick="window.open('http://docs.lib.purdue.edu/clcweb/vol13/iss3/14'); return false">http://docs.lib.purdue.edu/clcweb/vol13/iss3/14</a>
               </div>
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar">
               <a href="#">Preview</a>  |  <span style="color: grey">XML</span> |  <a href="#"
                  onclick="javascript:window.print();"
                  title="Click for print friendly version">Print Article</a>
            </div>
         </div>
      </div>
   </body>
</html>
