<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
      <title>[PREVIEW] DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly: </title>
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_screen.css" media="screen" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_print.css" media="print" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" /><style type="text/css">
        #mainContent {
          float: none;
          padding-top: 2em;
          padding-left: 4em;
          padding-right: 4em;
          margin-left: 225px;
           
        }</style></head>
   <body>
      <div id="mainContent">
         <div class="DHQarticle">
            <div id="pubInfo">Preview<br />Volume 015 Number 1
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar">
               <form id="taporware" action="get">
                  <div><a href="//preview/index.html">Preview</a>
                      | 
                     <a rel="external" href="//vol/15/1/000527.xml">XML</a>
                     
                     | 
                     		   Discuss
                     			(<a href="/dhq/vol/15/1/000527/000527.html#disqus_thread" data-disqus-identifier="000527">
                        				Comments
                        			</a>)
                     
                  </div>
               </form>
            </div>
            
            
            
            <div class="DHQheader">
               
               
               
               <h1 class="articleTitle lang en">Books Aren't Dead: Resurrecting Audio Technology and
                  Feminist Digital Humanities Approaches to Publication and Authorship
               </h1>
               
               <div class="author"><span style="color: grey">Emily Edwards</span> &lt;<a href="mailto:eledwar_at_bgsu_dot_edu" onclick="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('eledwar_at_bgsu_dot_edu'); return false;" onkeypress="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('eledwar_at_bgsu_dot_edu'); return false;">eledwar_at_bgsu_dot_edu</a>&gt;, Bowling Green State University
               </div>
               
               <div class="author"><span style="color: grey">Robin Hershkowitz</span> &lt;<a href="mailto:robinh_at_bgsu_dot_edu" onclick="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('robinh_at_bgsu_dot_edu'); return false;" onkeypress="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('robinh_at_bgsu_dot_edu'); return false;">robinh_at_bgsu_dot_edu</a>&gt;, Bowling Green State University
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               <span class="Z3988" title="url_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;rft_val_fmt=info%3Aofi%2Ffmt%3Akev%3Amtx%3Ajournal&amp;rfr_id=info%3Asid%2Fzotero.org%3A2&amp;rft.genre=article&amp;rft.atitle=Books%20Aren't%20Dead%3A%20Resurrecting%20Audio%20Technology%20and%20Feminist%20Digital%20Humanities%20Approaches%20to%20Publication%20and%20Authorship&amp;rft.jtitle=Digital%20Humanities%20Quarterly&amp;rft.stitle=DHQ&amp;rft.issn=1938-4122&amp;rft.date=&amp;rft.volume=015&amp;rft.issue=1&amp;rft.aulast=Edwards&amp;rft.aufirst=Emily&amp;rft.au=Emily%20Edwards&amp;rft.au=Robin%20Hershkowitz"> </span></div>
            
            
            
            
            <div id="DHQtext">
               
               
               
               <div id="abstract">
                  <h2>Abstract</h2>
                  
                  <p>This article explores how the podcast medium as a form of audio technology has
                     facilitated the reimagining of academic publication and feminist praxis. In this case
                     study, we situate the podcast <cite class="title italic">Books Aren’t Dead (BAD)</cite>, an
                     affiliate of the Fembot Collective, within a broader context of digital humanities
                     scholarship and the field's potential to utilize audio technology to realize feminist
                     approaches. <cite class="title italic">BAD</cite>, as a podcast, serves as an open-access
                     medium that brings authors and reviewers together in a collaborative context. Audiobook
                     reviews allow for a conversation between author and interviewer, whereby the author
                     can
                     place the work in a broader scholastic and contemporary context for listeners as well
                     as
                     actively engage with constructive critique and questions. The result is a dynamic
                     scholarly communication rather than the static textual product of a book review. We
                     discuss the unique role of audio technology within the knowledge production process
                     from a
                     performance studies and archival point of view. Additionally, in the spirit of the
                     project
                     <cite class="title italic">BAD</cite>, we also provide an addendum to our textual discussion
                     by including a podcast where we discuss these themes as co-producers, graduate students,
                     and young academics, exploring how audio technology can break down barriers to publication
                     and authorship.
                  </p>
                  
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
               
               <div class="counter"><a href="#p1">1</a></div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p1">Podcast Audio: <a href="resources/audio/audio01.mp3" onclick="window.open('resources/audio/audio01.mp3'); return false" class="ref">audio01.mp3</a>
                  <br />This podcast is an audio supplement to the article.
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p2">2</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p2">As an audio medium, podcasts are undergoing a renaissance in both consumption and
                     production [<a class="ref" href="#bech2014">Bech 2014</a>]. Alternatively, as some writers have noted [<a class="ref" href="#hempel2015">Hempel 2015</a>], today's podcast market is saturated with content. Although the
                     mutable form of a podcast may be situated in the historical context of radio broadcasting
                     [<a class="ref" href="#berry2016">Berry 2016</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#menduni2007">Menduni 2007</a>], a podcast is distinctively different from the radio
                     broadcast medium in modes of delivery, archiving, and function. Podcasting is a more
                     accessible audio format that has increasingly enabled a broad public to record
                     conversations, interviews, and fictional narratives as well as disseminate audio
                     recordings on various digital platforms rather than commercial airwaves. This article
                     explores the podcast medium as a form of audio technology within the dynamic field
                     of
                     digital humanities (DH). We argue that the podcast as an audio format has the potential
                     to
                     facilitate the reimagining of an academic publication as feminist praxis. As co-producers
                     of the podcast <cite class="title italic">Books Aren't Dead</cite> (<cite class="title italic">BAD</cite>), an affiliate of the <cite class="title italic">Fembot Collective,</cite> we
                     offer <cite class="title italic">BAD</cite> as a case study to discuss how the podcast embodies
                     feminist and critical approaches in the field of DH publication and project creation.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p3">3</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p3"><cite class="title italic">BAD</cite> features interviews of authors and creators of books,
                     academic works, and games that are at the intersection of feminism, new technology,
                     new
                     media, and digital spaces [<a class="ref" href="#fembot2019">Fembot 2019</a>]. <cite class="title italic">BAD</cite>
                     was relaunched in the fall of 2018 as part of its mother organization, the <cite class="title italic">Fembot Collective</cite>. The Fembot Collective was founded in 2009 at
                     the University of Oregon [<a class="ref" href="#fembot2019">Fembot 2019</a>]. Today, the Fembot Collective is a
                     vibrant, scholarly community and an open-access publishing platform, supported by
                     Manifold, that is home to the peer-reviewed journal <cite class="title italic">Ada: Journal of
                        Gender, New Media, and Technology,</cite> featuring the involvement of staff from
                     universities across the country [<a class="ref" href="#fembot2019">Fembot 2019</a>]. As a part of the Fembot
                     Collection, the <cite class="title italic">BAD</cite> podcast does not simply mediate and
                     produce content about feminism, technology, and media, but rather, <cite class="title italic">BAD</cite> directly intervenes in existing debates in the field of DH by producing a
                     feminist audio archive and foregrounding audio interviews as alternatives to written
                     book
                     reviews.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p4">4</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p4">To demonstrate how the podcast format expands our definitions of text and therefore,
                     what
                     counts as scholarship in DH, this article begins by examining the <cite class="title italic">BAD</cite> podcast in the context of feminist DH and the archival preservation of
                     feminist scholarship. We outline how podcasting as a medium and genre allows for the
                     expression and centralization of feminist values and forms of knowledge production.
                     We
                     then recount how podcasting permits the preservation of feminist voices and the curation
                     of an archive of feminist knowledge evidenced by two recent <cite class="title italic">BAD</cite> interviews. We discuss the significance of performance and mediation
                     between producer, listener, and interviewee in the podcast format. Next, we contextualize
                     how <cite class="title italic">BAD</cite> subverts and problematizes existing hierarchies in
                     academic publishing and models a feminist praxis. We conclude with encouragement for
                     other
                     DH practitioners interested in utilizing this audio format through small-scale feminist
                     DH
                     projects and publications.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">(Critical) Digital Humanities: Debates, Tensions, and Approaches</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p5">5</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p5"><cite class="title italic">BAD</cite> is situated within emerging debates in DH scholarship,
                     specifically the potential for DH projects to be transformative, feminist, and
                     intersectional. Today we witness the increased prominence of technological devices
                     in the
                     toolbox of humanities scholars [<a class="ref" href="#dobson2019">Dobson 2019</a>], which is situated within a
                     broader trend of the new “datafied” ways of reading, analyzing, and
                     deconstructing texts. These trends privilege a “big data” approach to
                     information [<a class="ref" href="#dobson2019">Dobson 2019</a>, 3]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#kitchin2014">Kitchin 2014</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#van2017">van Es and Schäfer 2017</a>]. This “big data” turn marginalizes feminist
                     and critical methods and deprivileges close readings, situated case studies, and the
                     subjective and contingent position of knowledge [<a class="ref" href="#leurs2017">Leurs 2017</a>]. Scholars have
                     noted the propensity of DH projects to at best fetishize digital technologies that
                     curate
                     and catalog mass amounts of information [<a class="ref" href="#dobson2019">Dobson 2019</a>, 68], or at worst,
                     that inadvertently reproduce dominant, oppressive structures and ideologies onto texts
                     and
                     archives [<a class="ref" href="#risam2015">Risam 2015</a>, 4]. The field of DH has been critiqued as
                     male-dominated and aligned with the neoliberal corporatization of academic knowledge
                     [<a class="ref" href="#allington2016">Allington et al. 2016</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#wernimont2018">Wernimont and Losh 2018</a>].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p6">6</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p6">Despite these important critiques of the field of DH, we situate <cite class="title italic">BAD</cite> as a DH project in the context of a vibrant tradition of feminist DH
                     scholarship, and we draw attention to how <cite class="title italic">BAD</cite> actualizes what
                     we view as the main goal of feminist DH work, to “...expand our
                     notions of text and context, archive and canon, and code and program”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#wernimont2018">Wernimont and Losh 2018</a>, xii]. Our intervention in this project of expansion is
                     the reimagining of the academic book review as a podcast, which falls within a longer
                     trajectory of feminist scholarship in DH. As Alexis Lothian and Amanda Phillips have
                     noted, “archives may be the most legible form of digital humanities
                     production”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#lothian2013">Lothian and Phillips 2013</a>, 6]. Our DH project produces the necessary historical
                     archives of feminist scholarship, but also expands upon the use and content of an
                     archive
                     in the podcast format [<a class="ref" href="#wernimont2013">Wernimont 2013</a>]. We take a broader view of archives,
                     moving away from the primacy of written texts and draw particular attention to how
                     audio
                     recordings serve as living archives. Therefore, in addition to the technology of the
                     feminist archive, <cite class="title italic">BAD</cite> also draws upon the affordances of
                     audio technology to expand the definition of text, thereby embracing feminist forms
                     of
                     knowledge production that characterize a feminist DH approach.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p7">7</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p7">Along with the expansion of texts, the importance of affective or mediated connection,
                     collaborative labor arrangements, and centralization of ethical values also shape
                     intersectional feminist DH [<a class="ref" href="#wernimont2018">Wernimont and Losh 2018</a>, xiii]. Following this call,
                     <cite class="title italic">BAD</cite> ultimately seeks to produce scholarly knowledge through
                     a transparent, collaborative process, via audio rather than textual means. We host
                     <cite class="title italic">BAD</cite> in an open-access format — available to stream on Anchor,
                     Spotify, Apple Podcasts, and our website <cite class="title italic">Books Aren't Dead</cite>
                     [<a class="ref" href="#hershkowitz2020">Hershkowitz and Edwards 2020</a>] — to bring authors and reviewers together in a
                     collaborative context to reimagine the traditional concept of a book review. As a
                     podcast,
                     the book review interview facilitates connectivity and collaboration between author
                     and
                     interviewer that is not possible through the process of writing a traditional textual
                     book
                     review.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p8">8</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p8">Our approach is in stark contrast to dominant publication models. Book reviews, in
                     the
                     traditional textual format, often appear in academic peer-reviewed journals, with
                     little
                     interaction between the reviewer and the author. Furthermore, book reviews are often
                     pay-walled and thus inaccessible to a broader public [<a class="ref" href="#brienza2012">Brienza 2012</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#logan2017">Logan 2017</a>]. Increasingly, academics at smaller institutions and
                     independent scholars struggle to pay for institutional or individual access to expensive
                     journal subscriptions [<a class="ref" href="#logan2017">Logan 2017</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#sample2012">Sample 2012</a>]. As a result, both the production and consumption of book
                     reviews alienates the reviewer, author, and audience from one another. As Alexis Lothian
                     and Amanda Phillips note, the <cite class="title italic">Fembot Collective</cite> — through its
                     commitment to collaborative, open peer review and an open-access platform — has “expanded [the] notion of what ‘article’ means” and more
                     broadly serves as an “innovator in scholarly communicative
                     possibilities” within the field of DH [<a class="ref" href="#lothian2013">Lothian and Phillips 2013</a>, 19].
                     Podcasting, therefore, offers an exciting approach that addresses critiques of DH
                     and
                     models how the field can challenge structures and hierarchies of power in the academy.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p9">9</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p9">Additionally, <cite class="title italic">BAD</cite> attempts to go beyond an additive approach
                     to feminist knowledge production by emphasizing the scholarly value of podcast interviews
                     not as addendums to textual book reviews, but as an alternative format. Roopika Risam,
                     in
                     problematizing Western biases in existing DH scholarship, notes that for scholars
                     committed to principles of social justice, including feminism, such scholars must
                     “challenge the exclusions in the record of digital knowledge”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#risam2018">Risam 2018</a>, 140]. Risam further argues that the simple inclusion of
                     marginalized voices is not enough; rather, we must “seize control over
                     the means of digital knowledge production”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#risam2018">Risam 2018</a>, 141]. In <cite class="title italic">BAD</cite>, we not only
                     include feminist voices in the digital culture record, but we also seize the microphone.
                     We create a new archive for a new era of DH scholarship that is feminist and
                     intersectional. In terms of content, this includes the preservation of feminist voices;
                     in
                     terms of structure, this includes the facilitation of mediated connection between
                     listener, producer, and interviewee; finally, in terms of practice, this project revises
                     exclusive definitions of authorship within academic publishing. Therefore, <cite class="title italic">BAD</cite> functions as an intervention by sharing and preserving
                     feminist voices through its interview format that expands DH's notions of text and
                     context
                     as well as archive and canon.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Books Aren't Dead: Archiving Feminist Voices Through Interviews</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p10">10</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p10">In line with feminist calls for context and close analysis, we turn to the feminist
                     work
                     of two podcasts. One of <cite class="title italic">BAD's</cite> key aims is to curate an
                     audible archive of feminist voices. Risam, in discussing the possibility of intersectional
                     approaches in the field of DH, emphasizes that the “relationship
                     between theory and praxis is integral to the digital humanities. Connections between
                     the
                     two appear in the archives built, corpora analyzed, oral histories recorded, and
                     geographies mapped”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#risam2015">Risam 2015</a>, 4]. Our interview with <cite class="title italic">Fembot
                        Collective</cite> founder Carol Stabile in <cite class="title italic">BAD</cite>'s inaugural
                     relaunch interview demonstrates such feminist digital humanities praxis; Stabile is
                     a
                     feminist media scholar and the Associate Dean for Strategic Initiatives of the College
                     of
                     Arts and Sciences at the University of Oregon. Archiving Stabile's work as a key figure
                     in
                     feminist media studies [<a class="ref" href="#stabile1992">Stabile 1992</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#stabile1994">Stabile 1994</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#stabile2006">Stabile 2006</a>], makes the knowledge in Stabile's scholarly monographs
                     accessible through the podcast format. The connection between feminist theory and
                     praxis
                     is realized in the content of <cite class="title italic">BAD's</cite> archives, and
                     specifically through our interview with Stabile.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p11">11</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p11">In this interview, we discussed Stabile's most recent work, <cite class="title italic">The
                        Broadcast 41: Women and the Anti-Communist Blacklist</cite>
                     [<a class="ref" href="#stabile2018">Stabile 2018</a>], which focuses on how forty-one progressive women writers,
                     performers, and creators working in the American television industry between the 1930s
                     and
                     1940s were forced out of their professions as targets of the “Red
                     Scare.” Stabile's book illustrates how this resulted in a television landscape
                     with a profound absence of progressive, feminist voices that we recognize in the
                     white-washed, conservative “Golden Age of Television” of the
                     1950s. In the interview, we connect contemporary forms of exclusion and marginalization
                     within audio and visual industries, such as the #MeToo movement to the early 20th
                     century,
                     as explored in Stabile's work.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p12">12</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p12">In the podcast conversation, we were interested in Stabile's process of connecting
                     the
                     early age of television production to the contemporary media landscape. Stabile noted
                     that
                     “moments when new media get introduced [are] really important
                     moments for studying the history of struggle”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#edwards2019a">Edwards and Hershkowitz 2019a</a>]. She situates the marginalization and disenfranchisement of
                     progressive women writers in the 1930s and 1940s concerning contemporary trends of
                     racial
                     bias and conservative capture of media institutions, which we have most recently witnessed
                     through the prominence of media figures such as President Donald Trump and
                     conspiracy-theorist Alex Jones [<a class="ref" href="#edwards2019a">Edwards and Hershkowitz 2019a</a>]. Stabile spoke about the
                     importance of highlighting the legacy of progressive women writers in the television
                     industry during the blacklist. She noted that by archiving the underexplored contributions
                     of progressive women in television, this “makes you understand that
                     you're not the first person to fight against the structures, but that you're part
                     of a
                     history of resistance. And I think that that can be inspiring and sustaining to people
                     who struggle today”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#edwards2019a">Edwards and Hershkowitz 2019a</a>].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p13">13</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p13">By curating these conversations with feminist authors such as Stabile, we highlight
                     the
                     existence of a community of feminist media scholars, emphasize the critical work that
                     is
                     being done in our own field, and underscore that resistance scholarship exists, even
                     if
                     not in one's home institution or department. Wernimont and Losh note that within the
                     field
                     of DH, feminist, antiracist work and scholarship are often actively minimized or viewed
                     as
                     superfluous to the field [<a class="ref" href="#wernimont2018">Wernimont and Losh 2018</a>, ix–xi]. In this scholarly
                     landscape where there are active questions of whether feminist, critical, antiracist,
                     and
                     postcolonial approaches are welcome in the field DH scholarship [<a class="ref" href="#mcpherson2012">McPherson 2012</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#risam2015">Risam 2015</a>], interviewing feminist scholars working in the fields of media,
                     technology, and science is an active response to the erasure of these approaches.
                     Building
                     our archive, we explicitly seek contributions that centralize feminist perspectives
                     to
                     counter institutional and field erasure [<a class="ref" href="#hershkowitz2019">Hershkowitz 2019</a>]. Additionally, we
                     structure the interview process to create an open network of scholarly discussions
                     accessible to those who may not have departmental structures that support feminist
                     research. By archiving interviews with authors writing within this intersection of
                     feminism, media, and technology, we create a new community of feminist scholars who
                     are
                     able to listen and engage.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p14">14</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p14">In our second interview with Polina Kroik about her book <cite class="title italic">Cultural
                        Production and the Politics of Women's Work in American Literature and Film</cite>
                     [<a class="ref" href="#kroik2019">Kroik 2019</a>], we discussed the legacy of women who are cultural producers
                     between the 1920s and 1950s. Kroik emphasized the relationship between changes in
                     technology, such as typewriters and the physical structures of offices, and how these
                     material changes inaugurated new modes and forms of authorship, which forced women
                     to
                     engage in forms of affective, emotional labor. These changes continue to inform emerging
                     power imbalances in the workplace that reverberate in cultural industries, such as
                     Hollywood, with Kroik also highlighting the #MeToo movement [<a class="ref" href="#edwards2019b">Edwards and Hershkowitz 2019b</a>].
                     With this interview, we emphasize the significance of not only the preservation of
                     Kroik's
                     voice as a feminist scholar, but the possibility of <cite class="title italic">BAD</cite> to
                     emphasize the historical marginalization and exclusion of female media producers,
                     creators, and writers in cultural industries.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p15">15</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p15">While we agree with Risam that an additive approach to critical DH is not enough [<a class="ref" href="#risam2018">Risam 2018</a>], the addition of podcast interviews serve as potential models for
                     alternative recording and publishing of feminist histories. The curation of a feminist
                     digital archive through podcasts is only one aspect of the significance of this type
                     of DH
                     work. The interview does not merely comprise a static archive; rather, the interview
                     can
                     be read beyond its status as a text and publication. The connections produced through
                     the
                     mediated performance of producer, interviewee, and listener also underscore the value
                     of
                     podcasts as an alternative form of book review publication that privileges connectivity
                     and affect, key principles in our feminist approach [<a class="ref" href="#wernimont2018">Wernimont and Losh 2018</a>, xiii].
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Podcaster, Guest, and Listening Audience: A Mediation of Performances</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p16">16</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p16">Podcasts can be a site of performance whereby the interviewer and interviewee share
                     affective, aural, and interpersonal intimacy that shapes knowledge creation and
                     circulation. Thus, we consider performance studies an important context with which
                     to
                     locate podcasting in feminist praxis. In one of the first edited academic collections
                     on
                     podcasting, <cite class="title italic">Podcasting: New Aural Cultures and Digital Media</cite>
                     (2018), the editors note that podcasts represent “the possibility, in
                     one ‘space,’ to create a considered yet engaging conversation that merges
                     criticality, scholarship, fandom, and practice, not to mention the possibility of
                     attracting an audience that found value in our conversations”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#llinares2018">Llinares and Fox 2018</a>, 1]. Here, the podcast is more than the mp3 file or an
                     audio recorded sound. The space is one of performance, invention, and even resistance.
                     As
                     performance studies scholars Richard Schechner and Sara Brady state, “performance must be construed as a broad spectrum or continuum of human actions,
                     ranging from ritual, play, popular entertainments, performing arts and everyday life
                     performances and to the enactment of professional, gender, race, and class roles”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#schechner2013">Schechner and Brady 2013</a>, 2]. As such, we emphasize how the various performances
                     within the production of podcasting underscore the potential for feminist DH praxis.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p17">17</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p17">Regardless of genre, podcasts are a type of performance where podcasters and guests
                     are
                     performing a certain version of themselves in collaborative communication. In emphasizing
                     the performance aspects of podcasting, we draw attention to the possibility of co-creation
                     through performance, which facilitates forms of affective, dynamic communication outside
                     of the removed and supposedly objective tone of the written book review. Podcasting
                     has
                     the potential for collaborative knowledge production between author and interviewee
                     through the shared experience of performance in the audio conversation. Additionally,
                     podcasts provide a staging ground for feminist conversations through the ease of podcast
                     production and distribution on digital platforms. Using the lens of performance studies,
                     we argue for the possibility of viewing podcasts as a medium that allows for the
                     centralization of feminist DH praxis.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p18">18</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p18">As an affective form of communication, the act of podcasting a book review connects
                     to
                     feminist DH praxis. The surplus information that the affect of podcasting invites
                     transforms the value of a book review to align with feminist approaches. Podcasts,
                     such as
                     <cite class="title italic">BAD</cite>, reveal previously hidden elements of academic
                     knowledge, such as the conditions of production, ethics, relationships, and the
                     socio-political context of the work. In our interviews, we are interested not simply
                     in
                     the content of the text but the authors' experience in producing the text. We particularly
                     want to emphasize the fluidity of a podcast performance that facilitates feminist
                     forms of
                     communicative engagement. The audience, while listening rather than reading, experiences
                     a
                     form of affective connection that allows for identification with the voices and the
                     centralization of feminist themes. The audience's experience of listening is now included
                     in the creation of knowledge. Each individualized listeners' decoding allows for and
                     encourages different places of entry and departure within the podcast.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p19">19</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p19">Just as the listener has the opportunity to engage with the podcast, the author or
                     interviewee has the potential to perform the self as an authoritative voice via
                     co-scriptive interactions and discussions. Typically, the accessibility of an academic
                     publication creates the scholarly authority, specifically if it is behind a paywall
                     and
                     situated within a vocabulary only understood by other academics. However, we contend
                     that
                     this type of scholarly authority is determined by institutional methods that are arbitrary
                     and prohibitive to a broader public. In <cite class="title italic">BAD</cite>, the interviewer
                     and the interviewee are not just performing scholarly inquiry but also engaging in
                     dynamic
                     communication throughout the interview that redefines scholarly authority. The interviewer
                     prepares written questions, but the conversation may change as she switches her line
                     of
                     inquiry to the author. Additionally, the author can lead the conversation in various
                     directions as part of an ongoing dialogue. Stacy Copeland emphasizes that in podcasts,
                     the
                     changing emotional tone of voice and other background audio allows for the podcast
                     to
                     become a form of affective media. Copeland states that in podcasts, “the material voice becomes a sticky surface to be stuck with multiple decodings,
                     re-workings and affect”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#copeland2018">Copeland 2018</a>, 220]. An interview between two people can become
                     “sticky” in the sense that emotional changes in voice, laughter, and
                     unexpected moments can produce the possibility for multiple points of engagement.
                     Stickiness, then, produces surplus affect and creates the conditions for greater dynamic,
                     dialogic engagement, thus providing a facet of connection that goes beyond the formulaic
                     structure of a book review.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p20">20</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p20">While Stabile and all the authors interviewed on <cite class="title italic">BAD</cite> are
                     experienced scholars, the relationship between interviewee and interviewer produces
                     a more
                     equitable relational dynamic compared to the structure of the book review in which
                     the
                     reviewer comments on and critiques a text from afar. The ability to ask questions
                     of
                     authors in real-time through the podcast performance for clarification, expansion
                     of
                     concepts, or even constructive critique, produces new knowledge and information about
                     the
                     monographs through dialogue and partnership. The interview not only produces a dynamic
                     product but through the process of the interview performance, the interviewer engages
                     in
                     authorship through performance. This method is directly aligned with feminist emphasis
                     on
                     collaborative forms of knowledge production outside of the confines of the academy
                     and the
                     exclusive academic publishing apparatus [<a class="ref" href="#lothian2013">Lothian and Phillips 2013</a>, 22].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p21">21</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p21">Our framing of podcasting as performance is an important contribution to feminist
                     DH
                     praxis. To be included within feminist DH praxis, the podcast ought to produce a unique
                     space for dialogue and engagement that was previously limited in the current state
                     of
                     academic publishing. We situate <cite class="title italic">BAD</cite> to serve as an aural
                     space for feminist scholarly engagement in the field of DH that is, at times, exclusionary
                     to feminist concerns, projects, and critiques [<a class="ref" href="#wernimont2018">Wernimont and Losh 2018</a>]. Another way
                     in which podcasting as performance establishes feminist DH praxis is that podcasts
                     ultimately represent active possibilities. These possibilities include performance,
                     affective connection, staging, learning, and the extension of the professional
                     relationship beyond the interview. Podcasts have the potential to directly archive
                     emotions and experiences, and therefore feminist ways of knowing, thus serving as
                     both
                     affective as well as physical archives. Affective archives preserve performances,
                     experiences, emotions, and interactions. Thus, the performance of podcasting is crucial
                     to
                     subverting academic hierarchies by creating archives beyond the physical and written
                     form.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Subverting Academic Publishing Hierarchies and Podcasting Feminist Futures</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p22">22</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p22">Subverting academic hierarchies through podcasting offers dynamic new opportunities
                     for
                     feminist DH practitioners. In our professionalization, we have been informed that
                     in the
                     hierarchy of publishing, book reviews may be lower in prestige and often serve as
                     a way
                     for graduate students to ease into publishing. Therefore, the individuals that do
                     engage
                     with book reviews may find their labor delegitimized and seen as “knowing their
                     place” and “doing their time.” However, we see engaging
                     with the labor of other people's work as incredibly important to elevate and legitimize
                     one another's research, especially for marginalized authors in academia. This is important
                     since the work of individuals who identify as Black scholars, indigenous scholars,
                     scholars of color, and female-identified and non-binary scholars, is underrepresented
                     in
                     academic literature and within the academic publishing industry [<a class="ref" href="#mirza2015">Mirza 2015</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#roh2016">Roh 2016</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#souto2007">Souto and Ray 2007</a>]. A feminist perspective shifts the focus on padding the
                     reviewer's CV to supporting the author in the interview space and amplifying feminist
                     scholarship.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p23">23</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p23">Another intervention is using sound. Podcasting can facilitate a more feminist use
                     of the
                     idea of voice, both literally and figuratively. Like many women, we were socialized
                     into
                     thinking our voices were not authoritative both in content and delivery. Just as
                     marginalized scholars confront an academic publishing apparatus that is biased towards
                     white, male forms of authorship and knowledge production [<a class="ref" href="#mirza2015">Mirza 2015</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#roh2016">Roh 2016</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#souto2007">Souto and Ray 2007</a>], feminine voices are audibly policed. This can manifest in the
                     characterization of “vocal fry” as unprofessional and unattractive [<a class="ref" href="#anderson2014">Anderson et al. 2014</a>], or a preference among men to listen to higher-pitched
                     femininized voices over average pitched tones [<a class="ref" href="#feinberg2008">Feinberg et al. 2008</a>]. However, we
                     maintain that a podcast's performative authorship breaks down barriers to knowledge
                     such
                     as paywalls, and also creates spaces for diverse voices to emerge and claim authority.
                     Podcasts become a way to intervene in the politics of sound.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p24">24</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p24">Along with amplifying voices, the form of podcasting itself challenges existing
                     hierarchies. The technical and financial barriers to entry are lower than many other
                     DH
                     methods. On the distribution side, platforms for producing and distributing podcasts,
                     such
                     as Anchor, have become increasingly user-friendly. Unlike most academic journals that
                     are
                     behind steep paywalls, listeners can access and download podcasts with financial and
                     technical ease. As a result, one can bypass expensive and narrow publishing models
                     while
                     increasing access and discovery of, in our case, feminist scholarship.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p25">25</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p25">Furthermore, DH projects should not be viewed as alternatives to traditional academic
                     practices; rather, the academic hierarchies must be changed to accommodate new ways
                     of
                     knowledge production. One example that both incorporates and challenges existing academic
                     frameworks is <cite class="title italic">Reviews of Digital Humanities</cite>, a journal
                     founded by Jennifer Guiliano and Roopika Risam in 2019. The goal of this open-access
                     journal “is to foster critical discourse about scholarship in a format
                     useful to other scholars,” publishing “project overviews
                     written by project directors alongside peer reviews written by members of digital
                     humanities communities”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#guiliano2020">Guiliano and Risam 2020</a>]. This project takes the form of incorporating previous
                     academic standards by existing as a peer-reviewed journal but expands upon the idea
                     of
                     what is considered eligible and credible to academic archives. Guiliano and Risam's
                     initiative demonstrates how creators of DH projects can still be legitimized by their
                     peers through rigorous reviews and evaluation, but with DH projects and publications
                     considered on their own terms, rather than trying to fit into the very evaluative
                     structure of academic journal publishing that DH practitioners are trying to subvert.
                     <cite class="title italic">BAD</cite>, therefore, synthesizes traditional academic publishing
                     conventions, such as the book review, with the podcasting format to realize the potential
                     of feminist scholarly engagement. The project models how small-scale feminist DH audio
                     projects can realize a different future for DH.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Conclusion</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p26">26</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p26">In conclusion, we have emphasized the significance and transformative potential of
                     utilizing audio technology to produce alternative forms of knowledge. We have situated
                     <cite class="title italic">BAD</cite> within the scholarly conversation of feminist DH
                     practice, drawing attention to expanding definitions of scholarly texts and the
                     possibility of creating a dynamic archive. <cite class="title italic">BAD</cite> utilizes
                     podcasting to highlight and preserve the work of feminist scholars writing within
                     spheres
                     of media and technology. Additionally, we have suggested the importance of drawing
                     on
                     performance studies to understand the mediated connection between audience, interviewee,
                     and producer, which is a form of collaborative connection unique to the podcast format.
                     Ultimately, in this article, we have demonstrated how podcasting can allow feminist
                     DH
                     practitioners to produce and publish scholarly knowledge in a way that effectively
                     challenges the hierarchical practices of academic publishing.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p27">27</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p27">This case study contributes to the feminist field of DH and serves as a call to action
                     for other feminist and critical DH scholars to engage with the audio medium of podcasting.
                     There is a burgeoning field of academic podcasts that demonstrate the exciting possibility
                     of producing knowledge from a variety of interdisciplinary perspectives using audio
                     technology, including the podcast <cite class="title italic">Rocking the Academy</cite> from
                     Mary Churchill and Roopika Risam, the <cite class="title italic">MFAngle Podcast</cite> from
                     Mirna Palacio Ornelas, Bessie F. Zaldívar, and Blessing Christopher et al., and the
                     podcast <cite class="title italic">Alt! Ack!</cite> from Robin Hershkowitz and Patrick Felton.
                     These are just a few examples of some exciting additions to the field of critical
                     podcasting.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p28">28</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p28">Ultimately, as a truly interdisciplinary field, DH includes ways of knowing that reject
                     arbitrary disciplinarily divisions of knowledge and structures of hierarchy within
                     the
                     academy. Technical knowledge has been streamlined by accessible programs and applications.
                     Thus, the opportunity to create is increasingly available to the public and individuals
                     with beginner levels of technical acumen. We believe that podcasting can be a radical
                     interdisciplinary intervention that challenges not only the textual form of scholarly
                     discourse but also its content. We have seized the mic at Bowling Green State University
                     as <cite class="title italic">BAD</cite> co-producers, and we hope this article serves as an
                     impetus to pass the mic to other DH scholars invested in feminist and critical
                     approaches.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
            </div>
            
            
            
            <div id="worksCited">
               <h2>Works Cited</h2>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="allington2016">
                     <!-- close -->Allington et al. 2016</span> Allington, D., S. Brouillette,
                  and D. Golumbia. “Neoliberal Tools (and Archives): A Political History
                  of Digital Humanities” (2016). <cite class="title italic">Los Angeles Review of
                     Books</cite>. Retrieved from: <a href="https://lareviewofbooks.org/article/neoliberal-tools-archives-political-history-digital-humanities/" onclick="window.open('https://lareviewofbooks.org/article/neoliberal-tools-archives-political-history-digital-humanities/'); return false" class="ref">https://lareviewofbooks.org/article/neoliberal-tools-archives-political-history-digital-humanities/</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="anderson2014">
                     <!-- close -->Anderson et al. 2014</span> Anderson, R.C., C.A. Klofstad, W.J.
                  Mayew, and M. Venkatachalam. “Vocal Fry May Undermine the Success of
                  Young Women in the Labor Market,”
                  <cite class="title italic">PLOS ONE </cite>9.5 (2014).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="bech2014">
                     <!-- close -->Bech 2014</span> Bech, L. “Is This the Golden
                  Age of Podcasts?,”
                  <cite class="title italic">Columbia Journalism Review</cite> (2014). Retrieved from: <a href="https://archives.cjr.org/behind_the_news/is_this_the_golden_age_of_podc_1.php" onclick="window.open('https://archives.cjr.org/behind_the_news/is_this_the_golden_age_of_podc_1.php'); return false" class="ref">https://archives.cjr.org/behind_the_news/is_this_the_golden_age_of_podc_1.php</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="bennett2015">
                     <!-- close -->Bennett 2015</span> Bennett, L. “The
                  First-Person Industrial Complex,”
                  <cite class="title italic">Slate</cite> (2015). Retrieved from: <a href="http://www.slate.com/articles/life/technology/2015/09/the_first_person_industrial_complex_how_the_harrowing_personal_essay_took.html" onclick="window.open('http://www.slate.com/articles/life/technology/2015/09/the_first_person_industrial_complex_how_the_harrowing_personal_essay_took.html'); return false" class="ref">http://www.slate.com/articles/life/technology/2015/09/the_first_person_industrial_complex_how_the_harrowing_personal_essay_took.html</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="berry2016">
                     <!-- close -->Berry 2016</span> Berry, R. “Podcasting:
                  Considering the Evolution of the Medium and Its Association with the Word
                  ‘Radio,’”<cite class="title italic">Radio Journal: International Studies in
                     Broadcast &amp; Audio Media</cite> 14.1 (2016): 7–22.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="brienza2012">
                     <!-- close -->Brienza 2012</span> Brienza, C. “Opening the
                  Wrong Gate? The Academic Spring and Scholarly Publishing in the Humanities and Social
                  Sciences,”
                  <cite class="title italic">Publishing Research Quarterly</cite> 28.3 (2012): 159–171.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="churchill">
                     <!-- close -->Churchill et al.</span> Churchill, M., Risam. R. Rocking the
                  Academy, (n.d.). Retrieved from: <a href="https://rocking-the-academy.simplecast.com" onclick="window.open('https://rocking-the-academy.simplecast.com'); return false" class="ref">https://rocking-the-academy.simplecast.com</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="copeland2018">
                     <!-- close -->Copeland 2018</span> Copeland, S. “A
                  Feminist Materialisation of Amplified Voice: Queering Identity and Affect in <cite class="title italic">The Heart.</cite>” In Llinares, D., Fox N., and R. Berry (eds.),
                  <cite class="title italic">Podcasting New Aural Cultures and Digital Media.</cite> Palgrave
                  McMillan, New York (2018): 209-225.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="dobson2019">
                     <!-- close -->Dobson 2019</span> Dobson, J.E. <cite class="title italic">Critical
                     Digital Humanities: The Search for a Methodology</cite>. University of Illinois Press,
                  Champaign (2019).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="edwards2019a">
                     <!-- close -->Edwards and Hershkowitz 2019a</span> Edwards, E., and R.
                  Hershkowitz. “Carol Stabile Interview,”
                  <cite class="title italic">Books Aren't Dead</cite> (2019). Retrieved from: <a href="https://fembotcollective.manifoldapp.org/projects/books-aren-t-dead/resource/carol-stabile-interview" onclick="window.open('https://fembotcollective.manifoldapp.org/projects/books-aren-t-dead/resource/carol-stabile-interview'); return false" class="ref">https://fembotcollective.manifoldapp.org/projects/books-aren-t-dead/resource/carol-stabile-interview</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="edwards2019b">
                     <!-- close -->Edwards and Hershkowitz 2019b</span> Edwards, E., and R.
                  Hershkowitz. “Polina Kroik Interview,”<cite class="title italic">Books Aren't Dead</cite> (2019). Retrieved from: <a href="https://fembotcollective.manifoldapp.org/projects/books-aren-t-dead/resource/polina-kroik-interview" onclick="window.open('https://fembotcollective.manifoldapp.org/projects/books-aren-t-dead/resource/polina-kroik-interview'); return false" class="ref">https://fembotcollective.manifoldapp.org/projects/books-aren-t-dead/resource/polina-kroik-interview</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="everett2003">
                     <!-- close -->Everett 2003</span> Everett, A., and J.T. Caldwell. <cite class="title italic">New Media: Theories and Practices of Digitextuality</cite>. Routledge,
                  New York (2003).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="feinberg2008">
                     <!-- close -->Feinberg et al. 2008</span> Feinberg, D.R., L.M. DeBruine, B.C.
                  Jones, and D.I. Perrett. “The Role of Femininity and Averageness of
                  Voice Pitch in Aesthetic Judgments of Women's Voices,”
                  <cite class="title italic">Perception</cite> 37.4 (2008): 615–623.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="fembot2019">
                     <!-- close -->Fembot 2019</span> Fembot Collective“Home.”(2019). Retrieved from: <a href="https://fembotcollective.manifoldapp.org/" onclick="window.open('https://fembotcollective.manifoldapp.org/'); return false" class="ref">https://fembotcollective.manifoldapp.org</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="guiliano2020">
                     <!-- close -->Guiliano and Risam 2020</span> Guiliano, J., and R. Risam.
                  “Welcome to Reviews in Digital Humanities”, <cite class="title italic">Reviews in Digital Humanities</cite> (2020)<cite class="title italic">.</cite>
                  Retrieved from: <a href="https://reviewsindh.pubpub.org" onclick="window.open('https://reviewsindh.pubpub.org'); return false" class="ref">https://reviewsindh.pubpub.org</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="hempel2015">
                     <!-- close -->Hempel 2015</span> Hempel, J. “If Podcasts
                  Are the New Blogs, Enjoy the Golden Age While It Lasts,”
                  <cite class="title italic">Wired</cite> (2015) Retrieved from: <a href="https://www.wired.com/2015/12/if-podcasts-are-the-new-blogs-enjoy-the-golden-age-while-it-lasts/" onclick="window.open('https://www.wired.com/2015/12/if-podcasts-are-the-new-blogs-enjoy-the-golden-age-while-it-lasts/'); return false" class="ref">https://www.wired.com/2015/12/if-podcasts-are-the-new-blogs-enjoy-the-golden-age-while-it-lasts/</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="hershkowitz2019">
                     <!-- close -->Hershkowitz 2019</span> Hershkowitz, R. Call for
                  Submissions: Books Aren't Dead Podcast. (2019).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="hershkowitz2020">
                     <!-- close -->Hershkowitz and Edwards 2020</span> Hershkowitz, R., and E.
                  Edwards. “Books Aren't Dead,”
                  <cite class="title italic">Books Aren't Dead</cite> (2020). Retrieved from: <a href="https://anchor.fm/booksarentdead/" onclick="window.open('https://anchor.fm/booksarentdead/'); return false" class="ref">https://anchor.fm/booksarentdead/</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="hershkowitzNA">
                     <!-- close -->Hershkowitz and Felton</span> Hershkowitz, R. and P. Felton.
                  <cite class="title italic">Alt! Ack!</cite> n.d. Retrieved from: <a href="https://anchor.fm/altack" onclick="window.open('https://anchor.fm/altack'); return false" class="ref">https://anchor.fm/altack</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="kitchin2014">
                     <!-- close -->Kitchin 2014</span> Kitchin, R. “Big Data,
                  new epistemologies and paradigm shifts,”
                  <cite class="title italic">Big Data &amp; Society</cite> 1, (2014): 1–12.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="kroik2019">
                     <!-- close -->Kroik 2019</span> Kroik, P. <cite class="title italic">Cultural
                     Production and the Politics of Women's Work in American Literature and Film</cite>.
                  Routledge, New York (2019).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="kuntsman2012">
                     <!-- close -->Kuntsman 2012</span> Kunstman, A. “Introduction: Affective Fabrics of Digital Cultures.” In Karatzogianni, A. and
                  A. Kuntsman, (eds), <cite class="title italic">Digital Cultures and the Politics of Emotion:
                     Feelings, Affect and Technological Change,</cite> Palgrave Macmillan, London
                  (2012).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="leurs2017">
                     <!-- close -->Leurs 2017</span> Leurs, K. “feminist data
                  studies: using digital methods for ethical, reflexive and situated socio-cultural
                  research,”
                  <cite class="title italic">Feminist Review</cite> 115, (2017): 130–154.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="llinares2018">
                     <!-- close -->Llinares and Fox 2018</span> Llinares, D., and N. Fox.
                  Eds<cite class="title italic">. Podcasting: New Aural Cultures and Digital Media</cite>.
                  Palgrave Macmillan, New York (2018).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="logan2017">
                     <!-- close -->Logan 2017</span> Logan, C. J. “We Can Shift
                  Academic Culture through Publishing Choices,”
                  <cite class="title italic">F1000 Research</cite> 6.518 (2017).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="lothian2013">
                     <!-- close -->Lothian and Phillips 2013</span> Lothian, A. and A. Phillips.
                  “Can Digital Humanities Mean Transformative Critique?,”
                  <cite class="title italic">Journal of E-Media Studies</cite> 3.1 (2013).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="mann2019">
                     <!-- close -->Mann 2019</span> Mann, R. “22. Paid to Do but
                  Not to Think: Reevaluating the Role of Graduate Student Collaborators.”In M. K.
                  Gold and L.F. Klein (eds.), <cite class="title italic">Debates in Digital Humanities
                     2019</cite>, University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis (2019).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="mcpherson2012">
                     <!-- close -->McPherson 2012</span> McPherson, T. “9:
                  Why Are the Digital Humanities So White? or Thinking the Histories of Race and
                  Computation.” In M.K Gold (ed.), <cite class="title italic">Debates in Digital
                     Humanities,</cite> University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis, MN (2012).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="menduni2007">
                     <!-- close -->Menduni 2007</span> Menduni, E. “Four Steps
                  in Innovative Radio Broadcasting: From QuickTime to Podcasting,”
                  <cite class="title italic">Radio Journal: International Studies in Broadcast &amp; Audio
                     Media</cite> 5.1 (2007): 9–18.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="mirza2015">
                     <!-- close -->Mirza 2015</span> Mirza, H. S. “Decolonizing
                  Higher Education: Black Feminism and the Intersectionality of Race and Gender,”
                  <cite class="title italic">Journal of Feminist Scholarship,</cite> 7–8 (2015): 1–12.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="palacio">
                     <!-- close -->Palacio et al.</span> Palacio Ornelas, M., B.F. Zaldívar, B.
                  Christopher, H. Ankong, S. Jones, S. Boudreau, D. Carrera, J. Forte, and T. Thompson.
                  <cite class="title italic">MFAngle Podcast</cite> (n.d.). Retrieved from: <a href="https://sites.google.com/vt.edu/mfanglepodcast/about?authuser=0" onclick="window.open('https://sites.google.com/vt.edu/mfanglepodcast/about?authuser=0'); return false" class="ref">https://sites.google.com/vt.edu/mfanglepodcast/about?authuser=0</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="risam2015">
                     <!-- close -->Risam 2015</span> Risam, R. “Beyond the
                  Margins: Intersectionality and the Digital Humanities,”
                  <cite class="title italic">DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly,</cite> 9.2 (2015).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="risam2018">
                     <!-- close -->Risam 2018</span> Risam, R. <cite class="title italic">New Digital
                     Worlds Postcolonial Digital Humanities in Theory, Praxis, and Pedagogy</cite>.
                  Northwestern University Press, Evanston (2018).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="roh2016">
                     <!-- close -->Roh 2016</span> Roh, C. “Inequalities in
                  Publishing,”
                  <cite class="title italic">Urban Library Journal</cite> 22. 2 (2016): 1-16.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="sample2012">
                     <!-- close -->Sample 2012</span> Sample, I. “Harvard
                  University Says It Can't Afford Journal Publishers' Prices,”
                  <cite class="title italic">The Guardian</cite>, (2012). Retrieved from: <a href="http://wavelets.ens.fr/BOYCOTT_ELSEVIER/ARTICLES/2012_04_24_The_Guardian.pdf" onclick="window.open('http://wavelets.ens.fr/BOYCOTT_ELSEVIER/ARTICLES/2012_04_24_The_Guardian.pdf'); return false" class="ref">http://wavelets.ens.fr/BOYCOTT_ELSEVIER/ARTICLES/2012_04_24_The_Guardian.pdf</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="schechner1985">
                     <!-- close -->Schechner 1985</span> Schechner, R. <cite class="title italic">Between theater &amp; anthropology</cite>. University of Pennsylvania Press,
                  Philadelphia (1985).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="schechner2013">
                     <!-- close -->Schechner and Brady 2013</span> Schechner, R. and S. Brady.
                  <cite class="title italic">Performance studies: an introduction</cite>. Routledge, London
                  (2013).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="souto2007">
                     <!-- close -->Souto and Ray 2007</span> Souto-Manning, M. and N. Ray. “Beyond Survival in the Ivory Tower: Black and Brown Women's Living
                  Narratives,”
                  <cite class="title italic">Equity &amp; Excellence in Education</cite> 40.4 (2007):
                  280–90.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="spinelli2019">
                     <!-- close -->Spinelli and Dann 2019</span> Spinelli, M. and L. Dann. <cite class="title italic">Podcasting. The Audio Media Revolution</cite>, Bloomsbury Academic,
                  London (2019).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="stabile1992">
                     <!-- close -->Stabile 1992</span> Stabile, C.A. “Shooting
                  the Mother: Fetal Photography and the Politics of Disappearance.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Camera Obscura Feminism, Culture, Media Studies</cite> 10, (1992):
                  178–205.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="stabile1994">
                     <!-- close -->Stabile 1994</span> Stabile, C. A. <cite class="title italic">Feminism
                     and the Technological Fix.</cite> Manchester University Press, Manchester, UK
                  (1994).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="stabile2006">
                     <!-- close -->Stabile 2006</span> Stabile, C. A. <cite class="title italic">White
                     victims, black villains: gender, race, and crime news in US culture,</cite> Routledge,
                  New York, NY (2006).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="stabile2018">
                     <!-- close -->Stabile 2018</span> Stabile, C.A. <cite class="title italic">The
                     Broadcast 41: Women and the Anti-Communist Blacklist</cite>. Goldsmiths Press, London
                  (2018).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="wernimont2013">
                     <!-- close -->Wernimont 2013</span> Wernimont, J. “Whence Feminism? Assessing Feminist Interventions in Digital Literary
                  Archives.”<cite class="title italic">DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly</cite> 7.1
                  (2013).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="wernimont2018">
                     <!-- close -->Wernimont and Losh 2018</span> Wernimont, J. and E. Losh.
                  “Introduction.”In J. Wernimont and E. Losh (eds.), <cite class="title italic">Bodies of Information Intersectional Feminism and the Digital
                     Humanities.</cite> University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis and London, (2018):
                  ix–xxvi.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="van2017">
                     <!-- close -->van Es and Schäfer 2017</span> van Es, K. and M. T. Schäfer. <cite class="title italic">The Datafied Society. Studying Culture through Data</cite>. Amsterdam
                  University Press, Amsterdam (2017).
               </div>
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar"><a href="#">Preview</a>  |  <span style="color: grey">XML</span> |  <a href="#" onclick="javascript:window.print();" title="Click for print friendly version">Print Article</a></div>
         </div>
      </div>
   </body>
</html>