<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
      <title>[PREVIEW] DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly: </title>
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_screen.css" media="screen" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_print.css" media="print" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" /><style type="text/css">
        #mainContent {
          float: none;
          padding-top: 2em;
          padding-left: 4em;
          padding-right: 4em;
          margin-left: 225px;
           
        }</style></head>
   <body>
      <div id="mainContent">
         <div xmlns:dhqBiblio="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/ns/biblio" class="DHQarticle">
            <div id="pubInfo">Preview<br />Volume 009 Number 02
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar">
               <form id="taporware" action="get">
                  <div><a href="/dhq/preview/index.html">Preview</a>
                      | 
                     <a rel="external" href="/dhq/vol/9/02/ 000217 .xml">XML</a>
                     
                     | 
                     		   Discuss
                     			(<a href="/dhq/vol/9/02/ 000217 / 000217 .html#disqus_thread" data-disqus-identifier=" 000217 ">
                        				Comments
                        			</a>)
                     
                  </div>
               </form>
            </div>
            
            <div class="DHQheader">
               
               
               
               
               <h1 class="articleTitle">Introduction to Feminisms and DH special
                  issue
               </h1>
               
               <div class="author"><span style="color: grey">Jacqueline
                     Wernimont</span> &lt;<a href="mailto:jwernimo_at_asu_dot_edu" onclick="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('jwernimo_at_asu_dot_edu'); return false;" onkeypress="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('jwernimo_at_asu_dot_edu'); return false;">jwernimo_at_asu_dot_edu</a>&gt;, Arizona State University
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               <span class="Z3988" title="url_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;rft_val_fmt=info%3Aofi%2Ffmt%3Akev%3Amtx%3Ajournal&amp;rfr_id=info%3Asid%2Fzotero.org%3A2&amp;rft.genre=article&amp;rft.atitle=Introduction%20to%20Feminisms%20and%20DH%20special%20issue&amp;rft.jtitle=Digital%20Humanities%20Quarterly&amp;rft.stitle=DHQ&amp;rft.issn=1938-4122&amp;rft.date=2015-08-26&amp;rft.volume=009&amp;rft.issue=02&amp;rft.aulast=Wernimont&amp;rft.aufirst=Jacqueline&amp;rft.au=Jacqueline%20Wernimont"> </span></div>
            
            
            <div id="DHQtext">
               
               
               <div id="abstract">
                  <h2>Abstract</h2>
                  
                  
                  <p>Introduction to the special issue of <cite class="title italic">Digital
                        Humanities Quarterly</cite> on Feminisms and DH, which offers
                     both background on the origins of the special issue and an
                     overview of the pieces therein.
                  </p>
                  
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               <div class="counter"><a href="#p1">1</a></div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p1">Special issues often capture a moment in time, an efflorescence of
                  critical engagement, or an urgent and timely shift in a field. If
                  most special issues are snapshots, "Feminisms
                  and DH" is something more like a long-exposure photograph,
                  a surreal composite that is simultaneously fiction and fact.
               </div>
               
               <div class="counter"><a href="#p2">2</a></div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p2">Let me indulge in a bit of scene-setting to help elucidate what I
                  mean about the surrealism of this issue and as way of practicing the
                  kind of self-disclosure that Chris Bourg and Bess Sadler argue is an
                  important design and accessibility feature in feminist work [<a class="ref" href="#bourg2015">Bourg and Sadler 2015</a>]. Katherine D. Harris and I first proposed
                  this special issue to the editorial board of <cite class="title italic">DHQ</cite> in January of 2012. We had been part of ongoing
                  discussions about "silences" in archives and were relatively
                  fresh off of a challenging roundtable titled "Editing Digital Feminisms" at the 2011 meeting of the
                  Society of Textual Scholarship (STS), which also included Marilee
                  Lindeman and Martha Nell Smith. The roundtable was great; what was
                  challenging from my perspective was the clear gender profile of
                  those in attendance – ours was a room full of women. While it was
                  (is) disheartening to imagine that our male colleagues weren’t
                  interested in feminist DH work, it struck us as particularly strange
                  given the history of the field. As Harris and I noted in our call
                  for this special issue, "several of the major DH
                  projects that are now at the forefront of the field had feminist
                  imperatives at the outset (for example: Women Writers Project,
                  the Orlando Project, and the Dickenson Archive), but it does not
                  seem to us that there has been a sustained inquiry into the
                  evolving relationships between feminist theory and DH
                  work."
               </div>
               
               <div class="counter"><a href="#p3">3</a></div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p3">In calling for a more sustained consideration of relationships
                  between feminist theories and digital humanities, we were calling
                  for engagements that helped enrich our sense of why feminisms
                  mattered to DH, beyond simply getting more women in the rooms. In
                  addition to issues of equity and access, at stake in the conception
                  of this special issue were the ethics and commitments in digital
                  humanities scholarship and teaching. Within a 12-month span leading
                  up to the proposal, there were discussions at the Modern Language
                  Association meeting about who was in and who was out of DH,<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e211">[1]</a>
                  Jamie Skye Bianco’s "This Digital Humanities
                  Which is Not One" and Tara McPherson’s "Why is the Digital Humanities So White?"
                  came out in print, and the seeds of the three-site THATCamp
                  Feminisms were sown by debates about coding, gender, and the
                  politics of DH. In response, the creative and critical pieces in
                  this special issue work to think not just about gender parity and
                  recovery, modes central to second wave feminisms, but also about
                  intersectional identities, labor, affect, and materiality in ways
                  aligned with third-wave and decolonizing feminisms. Several of the
                  pieces also reach outside of the admittedly porous boundaries of DH
                  to include Library and Information Studies, Postcolonial Studies,
                  Ethnography, and Game Studies as explicitly feminist interventions
                  in a field that can feel dominated by literary and textual
                  studies.
               </div>
               
               <div class="counter"><a href="#p4">4</a></div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p4">By invoking the surreality of long-exposure photography I mean to
                  point to the ways the interventions here are as necessary and fresh
                  as they might have been in 2012 or 2013. Given the production time,
                  this should be a blurry photograph, but the lack of sustained
                  engagement with feminist theory within DH makes it still rather
                  clear. Rather than being superseded, the interventions of each
                  piece, and of the collection as a whole, have only become more
                  urgent and it is striking that the field has not yet seen another
                  special issue on feminisms and digital humanities. As I write this
                  introduction the annual ADHO Digital Humanities conference is taking
                  place in Sydney, Australia. In some ways it seems as if nothing has
                  changed. As Scott Weingart has observed is his series of blog posts
                  on the ADHO conference, while 46% of DH2015 attendees are women,
                  they make up only 35% of authors with accepted papers.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e225">[2]</a> What’s more, his
                  analysis suggests that part of what makes DH so white (to paraphrase
                  McPherson) is that "there’s a very clear bias
                  against submissions by people with names non-standard to the
                  US."<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e231">[3]</a> Now, it is worth noting that a
                  single year does not a trend make (although he sees stable numbers
                  over three years with respect to gender) and that the ADHO
                  conference is not necessarily representative of the entirety of
                  digital humanities scholarship. Nevertheless, the questions we posed
                  in the call for this issue about the presence of a masculinized
                  research/tools track and a feminized pedagogy track, the elided
                  histories of feminist intervention, and exclusionary cultures within
                  DH are as urgent today as they were in 2012 
               </div>
               
               <div class="counter"><a href="#p5">5</a></div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p5">
                  "Feminisms and DH" confronts a number of
                  methodological and topical biases that continue to haunt the field
                  according to Weingart’s analysis. Jamie Skye Bianco’s "Man and His Tool, Again?: Queer and Feminist Notes
                  on Practices in the Digital Humanities and Object Orientations
                  Everywhere" uses a performative mode, previously theorized
                  in her 2012 "This Digital Huamnities Which is
                  Not One," to critique heteropatriarchal biases in a
                  textual studies dominated digital humanities. Her piece exemplifies
                  the "socially engaged critical
                  creativity" advocated by feminist scholars like Sarah
                  Kember and Joanna Zylenska; a thinking with and through the tools
                  that we critique [<a class="ref" href="#kember2013">Kember and Zylinska 2013</a>]. Her piece and the
                  companion teaching reflection by Nicole Starosielski push the
                  boundaries of traditional academic argument by insisting that
                  "creative critique" is central to how we communicate amongst
                  ourselves as scholars and with and to our students. 
               </div>
               
               <div class="counter"><a href="#p6">6</a></div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p6">Equally critical, argues Roopika Risam, is intersectionality as
                  "a lens for scholarship in the digital
                  humanities [that] resists binary logic, encourages complex
                  analysis, and foregrounds difference." This is an
                  important corrective that we have seen recently emerge in projects
                  like the Digital Diversity Timeline, Amy Earhart’s Diverse Histories
                  of DH, and Global Outlook DH to tell more diverse histories of
                  digital humanities work and thereby imagine alternative futures.
                  Risam draws on Sandra Harding’s work in feminist and postcolonial
                  Science and Technology Studies (STS), to foreground the
                  relationships between difference and technology. In addition to
                  suggesting the value of alternative histories, Risam does the
                  difficult work of charting theoretical foundations for alternative
                  digital humanities "methods that advocate
                  inclusion and critical analysis but are situated in the
                  materiality of technologies." In ways that blend the kind
                  of theoretical and historiographic work of both Risam and Bianco,
                  Gabrielle Dean’s "The Shock of the Familiar:
                  Three Timelines about Gender and Technology in the
                  Library" offers a set of provocations about not only the
                  history of librarianship and information technology, but also about
                  its possible futures. Like Bianco, Dean plays with argumentative
                  form, drawing on the timeline as both a critical and speculative
                  genre. Both Dean and Tanya Clement draw on Library and Information
                  Science disciplines to push digital humanists to grapple with both
                  the physical and epistemological sites of DH work, which is very
                  often housed in libraries and archives either literary,
                  metaphorically, or both.
               </div>
               
               <div class="counter"><a href="#p7">7</a></div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p7">Clement’s "The Information Science Question in
                  DH Feminism" brings the question of infrastructure and its
                  situated relations to the fore specifically through Information
                  Science and architectures and systems of knowledge. Like Bianco,
                  Risam, and Losh, Clement is interested the ways that a feminist
                  insistence on situated knowledge and "technologies of self-consciousness" draws attention to
                  technocultures and their underlying epistemic commitments. Drawing
                  on her own work on the Baroness von Freytag, Clement deftly
                  demonstrates how tools and subject become entangled as she pursues
                  the social text/body/network. The social body/network is central as
                  well to Moya Bailey’s "#transform(ing)DH Writing
                  and Research: An Autoethnography of Digital Humanities and
                  Feminist Ethics." Bailey further expands the question of
                  how we communicate amongst ourselves when undertaking research by
                  blurring the boundaries between the researcher and her
                  "subjects." Prioritizing "collaborative connections" in
                  order to enact a praxis of care that she sees at work in Black trans
                  women’s use of Twitter, Bailey’s autoethnography charts a different
                  mode of scholarly engagement than that envisioned by standard
                  protocols in the social sciences. 
               </div>
               
               <div class="counter"><a href="#p8">8</a></div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p8">Elizabeth Losh looks to feminist Media and Game Studies and STS to
                  suggest that it is critical to move networks and power formations
                  from ground to figure in feminist digital humanities. Citing the
                  example of the Ludica collective (Celia Pearce, Jacki Morie, Tracy
                  Fullerton and Janine Fron), she also imagines new ways for
                  collaborative, communal feminist work to unfold within DH.
                  Collaboration and social networks might be keywords for this special
                  issue. Bailey and Losh both point us to scholarly practitioners who
                  act as and within communities. Similar modalities have histories
                  within scholarly and activist communities of women of color, trans,
                  and queer folks. Work like that of the Crunk Feminist Collective
                  (<a class="ref" href="http://crunkfeministcollective.tumblr.com/" onclick="window.open('http://crunkfeministcollective.tumblr.com/'); return false">http://crunkfeministcollective.tumblr.com/</a>), Electronic
                  Disturbance Theater 2.0/b.a.n.g lab (<a class="ref" href="http://bang.transreal.org/about/" onclick="window.open('http://bang.transreal.org/about/'); return false">http://bang.transreal.org/about/</a>), the LatiNegrxs Project
                  (<a class="ref" href="http://lati-negros.tumblr.com/" onclick="window.open('http://lati-negros.tumblr.com/'); return false">http://lati-negros.tumblr.com/</a>) and GO::DH (<a class="ref" href="http://www.globaloutlookdh.org/" onclick="window.open('http://www.globaloutlookdh.org/'); return false">http://www.globaloutlookdh.org/</a> demonstrate that
                  interdisciplinary and inclusive collaborative communities have long
                  been present if not centered in digital humanities work. They also
                  illuminate how powerful community-driven mixed-media scholarship can
                  be — both as models of scholarly practice and as arguments that
                  illuminate technologies and practices of oppression. 
               </div>
               
               <div class="counter"><a href="#p9">9</a></div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p9">Constance Crompton, Ray Siemens, Alyssa Arbuckle, and the DMSEG team
                  use "Enlisting 'Vertues Noble &amp; Excelent'
                  Across Scholarly Cultures: Digital Collaboration and the Social
                  Edition" to reflect on the affordances and limitations of
                  social editing for the Devonshire Manuscript, a text that is itself
                  deeply social and networked. The team sought to create an inclusive,
                  visible editorial process as a way of prioritizing the processes of
                  editing and social networking over a traditional model of
                  consumption. In this they are perhaps the most conventional of all
                  of the projects discussed here, in so far as they are producing a
                  digital edition of an early modern text. But their efforts to expand
                  beyond traditional scholarly platforms and communities place their
                  work firmly in line with the other feminist interventions in this
                  special issue. These efforts were repaid with insights on the ways
                  that wiki platforms might enact social support functions akin to
                  early modern marginalia and, as if responding to Losh and Clement,
                  they foreground their own feminist epistemological commitments
                  through both their processes and their platform. But they also had
                  to grapple with the presence of trolls in their open edition, making
                  it clear that digital platforms are always "contact zones" of
                  the kind discussed by Mary Louis Pratt [<a class="ref" href="#pratt1991">Pratt 1991</a>].
                  Spaces where difference, dissensus, and even abuse can mingle in the
                  social text.
               </div>
               
               <div class="counter"><a href="#p10">10</a></div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p10">I began this introduction by invoking the analogy of long-exposure
                  photography, which produces surreal images in part because it
                  obscures differences across time. Streaky starry night images
                  preserve the traces of celestial bodies that appear at the beginning
                  of an evening, but are no longer visible by morning. We don’t have a
                  good equivalent of this in academic publishing. The contributors to
                  this volume are doing the hard work of bringing feminist theories
                  and practice together, each in her/their own way and their important
                  work is preserved here in this issue. Process — the additions,
                  deletions, revisions evoked by the social edition of the Devonshire
                  Manuscript project — is far less visible. Perhaps this is a way in
                  which the special issue is more surreal that the long-exposure
                  photograph; in advancing itself as a snapshot it erases the long
                  arc, privileging just the final product. Without this introduction,
                  "Feminisms and DH" could well appear
                  to be the labor of a single issue editor when it was inaugurated by
                  two and significantly supported by <cite class="title italic">DHQ</cite>
                  staff. It could look like a collection of eleven authors across
                  eight pieces, instead of an issue that contains within it the traces
                  and published work of seventeen authors across fourteen pieces.
               </div>
               
               <div class="counter"><a href="#p11">11</a></div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p11">As feminist theory has long known, our work is embodied and this
                  embodiment manifests in this issue as institutional and professional
                  limits, geographic moves, pregnancies, illnesses, and
                  self-determining redirections. In some instances this has left gaps
                  in the final product – spaces where voices were to be heard, but
                  aren’t for a variety of reasons. These absent voices register for me
                  as faded streaks in the long exposure image. Harris and I invited
                  more experimental pieces for an "assemblage"”section in our
                  original call, which is realized in Bailey, Bianco, and Dean’s
                  pieces but was envisioned to be larger and more experimental still.
                  A vibrant discussion of the distance between the representation of
                  women in the profession and feminist agendas is absent and much
                  needed. Engagement with queer theories and praxis are similarly
                  limited despite the great work being done in venues like <a class="ref" href="http://adanewmedia.org/issues/issue-archives/issue5/" onclick="window.open('http://adanewmedia.org/issues/issue-archives/issue5/'); return false"><cite class="title italic">ada: the journal of gender, new media,
                        and technology</cite></a> (see for example issue #5 on
                  Queer Feminist Media Praxis).
               </div>
               
               <div class="counter"><a href="#p12">12</a></div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p12">The pieces herein are working to redefine DH and they all point to
                  larger, often marginalized fields of creative and critical work.
                  Bailey and Rissam’s articles function as entré points to the work
                  being done by women and feminists of color both in the U.S. and
                  internationally that has too often had to find home outside of DH as
                  such but is nevertheless transforming both how scholarship is done
                  and on what terms. Crompton et al.’s chapter similarly points to the
                  rich vein of work being done and still to be done on the various
                  affordances and risks of social media and open platforms for
                  feminist digital production and scholarship. As suggested by Bianco,
                  Dean, and Clement, a more robust theorization of feminist digital
                  humanities requires understanding the ways in which academic
                  structures subsume feminist innovation and critique, appropriating
                  both the insights and power of subversive work. Finally, as nearly
                  every piece herein demonstrates, if we are to have a more just
                  feminist digital humanities, we must attend to the ways that
                  academic practices and digital spaces and tools are being leveraged
                  by those with power — very often to limit marginalized people and at
                  the most extreme in order to consume or promote violence against
                  women, people of color, and trans people. 
               </div>
               
               <div class="counter"><a href="#p13">13</a></div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p13">Gaps and silences aren’t unique to this special issue – there are
                  always declined invitations, rejected articles, pieces withdrawn or
                  delayed or never written – but having had the privilege of watching
                  the process, they strike me as important traces. Affect, another
                  feminist keyword, was everywhere present in struggles over and in
                  reviews, anxieties about timelines, celebrations of new directions,
                  and the mourning of losses. Anger, frustration, sorrow, and joy are
                  co-present on these pages and in the margins of this issue, and yet
                  are nearly absent from the reader’s perspective. From the privileged
                  position of editor, I am acutely aware of how disciplinary,
                  technical, and personal constraints have shaped this volume.
               </div>
               
               <div class="counter"><a href="#p14">14</a></div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p14">I draw attention to this as a way of testifying obliquely to the
                  challenges that continue to shape feminist engagements within
                  digital humanities (probably within academia more generally as
                  well). I want to observe openly that this volume is shaped in ways
                  that may well be inarticulable but are at the heart of feminist
                  commitments to seeing knowledge production as material, embodied,
                  affective, situated, and labor. bell hooks writes about citing gaps
                  in archives and histories as a way to "let the
                  reader know that something has been missed" and I want to
                  mark that the pressures that come to bear on women’s bodies, lives,
                  and work mean that there are known gaps here [<a class="ref" href="#hooks2004">hooks 2004</a>]. One of the great insights, I think, of the
                  contributions to this volume is that there are also many unknown
                  gaps and that intersectional, interdisciplinary, and multimodal work
                  is essential to that process of seeing what we do not yet know is
                  missing. Ellen Rooney argues that "feminist
                  address" is a performative, critical act that creates
                  constituencies and brings feminist positions into being – it is a
                  generative, poetic process through which alternative futures are
                  created [<a class="ref" href="#rooney2006">Rooney 2006</a>]. Herein are eight different
                  modes of feminist address and they are powerful but partial
                  beginnings.
               </div>
               
               <div class="counter"><a href="#p15">15</a></div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p15">- Jacqueline Wernimont</div>
               
               
               
               
               
               
            </div>
            
            <div id="notes">
               <h2>Notes</h2>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e211"><span class="noteRef">[1]</span>
                  see Stephen Ramsay’s write up of the MLA Roundtable <a class="ref" href="http://stephenramsay.us/text/2011/01/08/whos-in-and-whos-out/" onclick="window.open('http://stephenramsay.us/text/2011/01/08/whos-in-and-whos-out/'); return false">http://stephenramsay.us/text/2011/01/08/whos-in-and-whos-out/</a></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e225"><span class="noteRef">[2]</span><a class="ref" href="http://www.scottbot.net/HIAL/" onclick="window.open('http://www.scottbot.net/HIAL/'); return false">http://www.scottbot.net/HIAL/</a></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e231"><span class="noteRef">[3]</span>ibid.
               </div>
            </div>
            <div id="worksCited">
               <h2>Works Cited</h2>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="bourg2015">
                     <!-- close -->Bourg and Sadler 2015</span> Chris Bourg
                  and Bess Sadler, "Feminism and the Future of
                  Library Discovery"
                  <cite class="title italic">code{4}lib</cite> Issue 28 (April), 2015.
                  Stable URL: <a class="ref" href="http://journal.code4lib.org/articles/10425" onclick="window.open('http://journal.code4lib.org/articles/10425'); return false">http://journal.code4lib.org/articles/10425</a>
                  
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="kember2013">
                     <!-- close -->Kember and Zylinska 2013</span>  Sarah
                  Kember and Joanna Zylinska, <cite class="title italic">Life After New
                     Media</cite> (MIT, 2013), 177.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="pratt1991">
                     <!-- close -->Pratt 1991</span>  Mary Louise Pratt
                  "Arts of the Contact Zone,"
                  <cite class="title italic">Profession</cite> (1991), pp. 33-40.
                  Published by: Modern Language Association. Stable URL: <a class="ref" href="http://www.jstor.org/stable/25595469" onclick="window.open('http://www.jstor.org/stable/25595469'); return false">http://www.jstor.org/stable/25595469</a></div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="rooney2006">
                     <!-- close -->Rooney 2006</span> Ellen Rooney, "Introduction,"
                  <cite class="title italic">Cambridge Companion to Feminist Literary
                     Theory</cite> (Cambridge, 2006), 16.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="hooks2004">
                     <!-- close -->hooks 2004</span> bell hooks, "Choosing the Margin as a Space of Radical
                  Openness,"
                  <cite class="title italic">The Feminist Standpoint Theory Reader:
                     Intellectual and Political Controversies</cite>, Sandra G.
                  Harding (ed.), (Routledge, 2004), 154.
               </div>
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar"><a href="#">Preview</a>  |  <span style="color: grey">XML</span> |  <a href="#" onclick="javascript:window.print();" title="Click for print friendly version">Print Article</a></div>
         </div>
      </div>
   </body>
</html>