<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
      <title>[PREVIEW] DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly: </title>
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_screen.css" media="screen" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_print.css" media="print" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" /><style type="text/css">
        #mainContent {
          float: none;
          padding-top: 2em;
          padding-left: 4em;
          padding-right: 4em;
          margin-left: 225px;
           
        }</style></head>
   <body>
      <div id="mainContent">
         <div class="DHQarticle">
            <div id="pubInfo">Preview<br />Volume 014 Number 3
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar">
               <form id="taporware" action="get">
                  <div><a href="//preview/index.html">Preview</a>
                      | 
                     <a rel="external" href="//vol/14/3/000465.xml">XML</a>
                     
                     | 
                     		   Discuss
                     			(<a href="/dhq/vol/14/3/000465/000465.html#disqus_thread" data-disqus-identifier="000465">
                        				Comments
                        			</a>)
                     
                  </div>
               </form>
            </div>
            
            <div class="DHQheader">
               
               
               
               
               <h1 class="articleTitle lang en">Digital Humanities as Epistemic Cultures: How DH
                  Labs Make Knowledge, Objects, and Subjects
               </h1>
               
               
               <div class="author"><span style="color: grey">James W. Malazita
                     </span> &lt;<a href="mailto:malazj_at_rpi_dot_edu" onclick="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('malazj_at_rpi_dot_edu'); return false;" onkeypress="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('malazj_at_rpi_dot_edu'); return false;">malazj_at_rpi_dot_edu</a>&gt;, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
               </div>
               
               <div class="author"><span style="color: grey">Ezra J. Teboul
                     </span> &lt;<a href="mailto:teboue_at_rpi_dot_edu" onclick="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('teboue_at_rpi_dot_edu'); return false;" onkeypress="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('teboue_at_rpi_dot_edu'); return false;">teboue_at_rpi_dot_edu</a>&gt;, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
               </div>
               
               <div class="author"><span style="color: grey">Hined Rafeh
                     </span> &lt;<a href="mailto:rafehh_at_rpi_dot_edu" onclick="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('rafehh_at_rpi_dot_edu'); return false;" onkeypress="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('rafehh_at_rpi_dot_edu'); return false;">rafehh_at_rpi_dot_edu</a>&gt;, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               <span class="Z3988" title="url_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;rft_val_fmt=info%3Aofi%2Ffmt%3Akev%3Amtx%3Ajournal&amp;rfr_id=info%3Asid%2Fzotero.org%3A2&amp;rft.genre=article&amp;rft.atitle=Digital%20Humanities%20as%20Epistemic%20Cultures%3A%20How%20DH%20Labs%20Make%20Knowledge,%20Objects,%20and%20Subjects&amp;rft.jtitle=Digital%20Humanities%20Quarterly&amp;rft.stitle=DHQ&amp;rft.issn=1938-4122&amp;rft.date=&amp;rft.volume=014&amp;rft.issue=3&amp;rft.aulast=Malazita&amp;rft.aufirst=James W.&amp;rft.au=James W.%20Malazita&amp;rft.au=Ezra J.%20Teboul&amp;rft.au=Hined%20Rafeh"> </span></div>
            
            <div id="DHQtext">
               
               
               <div id="abstract">
                  <h2>Abstract</h2>
                  
                  
                  <p>This essay develops a conceptual framework for examining and practicing digital
                     humanities (DH) and DH labs from the perspective of science and technology
                     studies and laboratory studies. We argue that the
                     “situatedness” of DH labs extends beyond
                     physical/institutional space and includes also epistemic, political,
                     sociological, and disciplinary issues. To explore this, we first outline the
                     constructivist model of laboratory knowledge practices developed through
                     feminist laboratory studies, and how that model’s focus on the laboratory as a
                     producer of research subjects, rather than a container for them, runs counter to
                     narratives about laboratories in DH. We then show how DH labs produce research
                     objects, research subjects, epistemic context, and disciplinary legitimacy.
                     Finally, we present the case of the Tactical Humanities Lab (THL) at Rensselaer,
                     a DH lab situated through Science &amp; Technology Studies and housed within an
                     engineering-centered institute. Through the highlighting of two student-led
                     projects, we show how THL knowledge workers navigate issues of our own identity,
                     the boundaries of STS and DH, the practice of social justice through DH, and the
                     social construction of the boundaries of laboratory work.
                  </p>
                  
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">1. Introduction</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p1">1</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p1"> How we as digital humanities (DH) scholars construct the laboratory — as a
                     space, as a culture, as an imaginary, as a process, as an apparatus —
                     contributes to the material and epistemic production of DH labs, their spaces,
                     cultures, practices, and products. Our foci in this essay are the disciplinary
                     constructions of the laboratory and its products as epistemic cultures [<a class="ref" href="#knorrcetina1999">Knorr Cetina 1999</a>], and the expansion of the
                     “situatedness” of DH labs beyond physical/institutional
                     space to include epistemic, political, sociological, and disciplinary concerns.
                     Rather than narrowly framing labs as spaces of technical production and inquiry,
                     we begin from the premise that laboratory structures and cultures produce
                     specific kinds of knowledge practitioners. These practitioners in turn produce
                     and police the boundaries of legitimate and recognizable knowledge work —
                     including in the Digital Humanities. All of these productions are, in part,
                     results of particular institutional and disciplinary positions, even as they can
                     sometimes be presented as “matters of fact”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#latour2004">Latour 2004</a>]. An “opening up” of the
                     imaginations of how DH situates itself and of how DH practices configure and
                     reconfigure researchers can, in turn, serve as an opening up of new
                     disciplinary, institutional, and political formations of DH knowledge work.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p2">2</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p2">We will make this case by using Science &amp; Technology Studies’ (STS) “Laboratory Studies” literature to examine DH labs and
                     their practices, and through illustrations of how the Tactical Humanities Lab
                     (THL), an STS-situated DH lab at Rensselaer, grapples with its own identity, the
                     constructed boundaries of STS and DH, and the social construction of the
                     boundaries of laboratory work. The THL is in many ways an improvised space,
                     operating out of shared spaces and funded by a new professor's startup fund,
                     contrasting with more institutionally supported labs (e.g. [<a class="ref" href="#foka2017">Foka et al. 2017</a>]). With this spirit of relative outsider, the THL
                     operates as an inverse of the typical imagination of the relationship between DH
                     theory and practice. Rather than asking how technical tools can be applied to
                     humanities questions, the THL focuses on how method and inquirer are mutually
                     shaped through research practices, and on how the “divide”
                     between technical and interpretive scholarship and methods is a historical and
                     contingent one. This flipped model encourages faculty, graduate students, and
                     undergraduate students in the THL to co-theorize about the multiple social
                     constructions of the digital and the virtual in humanistic and social scientific
                     cultures, and to experiment with using DH to produce new situations for social
                     justice. 
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">2. Laboratory Studies and the Production of Subjects and Objects</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p3">3</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p3"> Laboratory Studies of the late 1970s/early 1980s represented a seismic shift in
                     the then-still-emerging field of STS. While work in the Sociology of Scientific
                     Knowledge (SSK) had been present in British STS circles since the late 1960s
                     [<a class="ref" href="#bloor1976">Bloor 1976</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#collins1975">Collins 1975</a>], SSK had largely focused on the relationships among
                     macro-social and historical narratives and events upon scientific enterprise,
                     particularly in terms of how scientific controversies are created, debated, and
                     resolved. The social, ideological, and historical were either treated as
                     external factors that potentially led to the “incorrect”
                     interpretation of work generated by scientific research, or were constructed as
                     variables that intersect with scientific knowledge [<a class="ref" href="#bloor1983">Bloor 1983</a>].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p4">4</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p4">Through the use of ethnographic method, Laboratory Studies focused on scientific
                     work as <em class="emph">in situ</em> practice, where the wider results of
                     “science” were negotiated and produced through the
                     everyday activities of scientific practitioners and knowledge workers. Perhaps
                     the most broadly recognizable early Lab Studies work was Bruno Latour and Steve
                     Woolgar’s tracing of knowledge production in Roger Guilleman’s Salk Institute
                     labs in <cite class="title italic">Laboratory Life </cite>(1979). The book would
                     build the foundations for Latour’s later work on Actor-Network Theory (ANT),
                     whose “flattening” of the agency of non-humans and things in
                     daily life would become majorly influential both inside and outside of STS
                     circles. The presence of ANT can be seen in DH work [<a class="ref" href="#bianco2012">Bianco 2012</a>],
                     flat ontology [<a class="ref" href="#bogost2012">Bogost 2012</a>], object-oriented [<a class="ref" href="#bryant2011">Bryant 2011</a>], speculative [<a class="ref" href="#harman2011">Harman 2011</a>], and media
                     archeological [<a class="ref" href="#parikka2016">Parikka 2016</a>] literatures.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p5">5</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p5">While ANT’s highlighting of the agency of objects and “the
                     missing masses”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#latour1992">Latour 1992</a>] is often positioned as a “counter” to social constructivist critique of science [<a class="ref" href="#bloor1999">Bloor 1999</a>], STS has tended to treat these approaches as dual
                     components of a broader “both/and” analysis of scientific
                     practice [<a class="ref" href="#winner1980">Winner 1980</a>]. Object-oriented fans of Latour’s later ANT
                     work may be surprised reading <cite class="title italic">Laboratory Life</cite>,
                     which uses a clearly social constructivist interpretation of scientific
                     practice. Latour and Woolgar conceive of the scientific fact as constructed —
                     not only in terms of the processes of interpretive, interpersonal, and
                     methodological negotiations that occur during research practices, but also in
                     terms of the need for political and social institutions to legitimate scientific
                     knowledge. Though this argument is accused by some of radical postmodernism or
                     correlationism [<a class="ref" href="#harman2011">Harman 2011</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#bryant2011">Bryant 2011</a>] or of denying reality [<a class="ref" href="#eidin2004">Eidin 2004</a>],
                     its analytic power has been made even more evident during the US Trump
                     administration. The “production of ignorance”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#kleinman2013">Kleinman et al. 2013</a>] about global warming, for example, is more than
                     just the spread of misinformation and deletion of data. It is also the
                     systematic undermining of the institutions that give scientific facts their
                     legitimacy and political power — universities, government agencies, grant
                     agencies, congressional commissions, educational systems, and the media. From
                     this more relational perspective of ANT/social constructivist approaches, the
                     networks of humans, non-humans, institutions, and infrastructures that produce
                     knowledge appear less like antagonistic or collaborative forces pushing against
                     one another, and more like a mapping of the contingent material and social
                     forces that “lash-up” the realities and practices we believe
                     to be concretized [<a class="ref" href="#bijker2012">Bijker et al. 2012</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#molotch2003">Molotch 2003</a>].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p6">6</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p6"> Further, Latour and Woolgar argue that the construction of scientific knowledge
                     — and in particular, of “facts” — socially produces
                     neutrality and objectivity. While the scientific method is far from neutral, and
                     while scientific knowledge workers spend large amounts of time debating and
                     negotiating interpretations of experimental results, these results tend to be
                     reported as objective fact in scientific publications; the rhetorical and
                     epistemological frame of “facts which speak for
                     themselves.” In this way, Laboratory Studies scholars argue that the
                     broader institutional, cultural, and political milieus of scientific practice
                     are not the <em class="emph">contexts</em> of laboratory practices, they are
                     <em class="emph">productions</em> of those practices. The results, methods,
                     interpretations, and political impact of scientific research are thus
                     co-produced and co-legitimized through the practices of scientific knowledge
                     workers.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p7">7</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p7"> The Laboratory Studies of the 1990s would extend the analysis of the laboratory
                     as a site of multi-modal production. Among the most vital work of this era was
                     that of Karin Knorr Cetina, which culminated in the publication of <cite class="title italic">Epistemic Cultures</cite> in 1999. Knorr Cetina’s research, a
                     comparative analysis of ethnographic experiences at a molecular biology lab and
                     at the CERN High-Energy Physics (HEP) lab, served as a major blow to the “Unity of Science” epistemological frame — the idea that
                     all scientific practices are united under a grander methodological and empirical
                     truth, and therefore that all scientific practices, properly arranged, can
                     contribute to an unbroken, consistent accounting for the natural and social
                     world [<a class="ref" href="#knorrcetina1999">Knorr Cetina 1999</a>]. Rather, Knorr Cetina argues that
                     different scientific disciplines — and even different localized scientific
                     research apparatuses — produce different epistemic cultures: different ways that
                     knowledge is produced and disseminated, facts and research are legitimized, the
                     “empirical” and the “theoretical” are
                     defined and related, laboratory apparatuses and equipment are socially
                     constructed, and institutions and structures are built and maintained.
                     “Science,” then, is radically disunified — the practices
                     and epistemic frameworks of different scientific knowledge spaces are not
                     interoperable without further interpretive, constructive, and political work,
                     and do not “add up” to a unified view of the world. The
                     production of a unified Science is more institutional than it is epistemic, with
                     the separation of the “objective and neutral” disciplines
                     from “softer and interpretive” ones providing political and
                     ideological legitimacy, often accompanied by larger funding streams and
                     infrastructural support [<a class="ref" href="#malazita2018b">Malazita 2018b</a>].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p8">8</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p8">Earlier Lab Studies work tended to make agential cuts between the labor of
                     laboratory practitioners and the outcomes of laboratories; i.e., the material
                     and social productions of laboratory work were the results of the collective
                     action of lab workers and the actor-networks of which they were a part. Knorr
                     Cetina, however, argued that the lab workers themselves, subjectively and
                     epistemically, were also products of the laboratory apparatus. The intra-actions
                     [<a class="ref" href="#barad2007">Barad 2007</a>] of discursive, material, and institutional
                     networks produce laboratory researchers as “epistemic
                     subjects”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#knorrcetina1999">Knorr Cetina 1999</a>], or practitioners attuned to particular ways of
                     knowing, of ways of bounding internal and external disciplinary knowledge, and
                     ways of producing the institutions and infrastructures needed to legitimize that
                     knowledge and its boundaries. Latour and Woolgar’s observations of the
                     production of the “neutrality” of a scientific fact can be
                     extended through Knorr Cetina: scientific knowledge workers also co-produce
                     themselves as knowers of “neutral” research.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p9">9</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p9"> As the identities and subjectivities of scientific practitioners are not
                     pre-given, neither are their objects of study, which Knorr Cetina calls “epistemic objects” (1999). Epistemic objects are
                     produced through the boundaries drawn around what makes an object knowable.
                     These boundaries are material and social. Global Warming, for example, can be
                     produced as a scientific object, an economic object, a social object, a
                     political object, and/or a synthesis of any of the prior through the apparatuses
                     enrolled [<a class="ref" href="#callon1982">Callon and Law 1982</a>] to know and bound it, through the practices
                     of scientists, journalists, politicians, and their interests, and through the
                     theories and technologies of knowing capable or chosen to be deployed. The
                     co-productions of epistemic subjects and objects are not
                     “just” rhetorical or framing moves; how we construct the
                     formation of our objects of study and our relationships to them produces lasting
                     and durable infrastructures and institutions of knowledge.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p10">10</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p10"> The production of epistemic objects, subjects, and infrastructures transverses
                     and co-produces the boundaries of applied and theoretical work, as well as the
                     boundaries of the physical and the virtual. For example, in her studies of HEP,
                     Knorr Cetina describes how the laboratory apparatus is designed through the
                     co-constructions of the physical high-energy particles and their digital
                     representations: 
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>
                           The experiment designs and builds the apparatus in which
                           the particles register. Physicists, however, do not start with the
                           particles, they start with representations of the detector, that is,
                           “offline” manipulations of the signals
                           extracted from detectors after data have been taken. This level of
                           representation reconstructs the events in the detector and slowly molds
                           these signals into a form that echoes the particles of interest to
                           physicists. [<a class="ref" href="#knorrcetina1999">Knorr Cetina 1999</a>, 49]
                        </p>
                     </blockquote>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p11">11</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p11"> The typical rhetoric of the physical/virtual divide is complicated in laboratory
                     knowledge practices. Rather than the digital representations of particles being
                     “results” of physical particles, they are embedded among
                     physical particles and among the epistemic objects of particles, made
                     perceptible by laboratory researchers as epistemic subjects and by the apparatus
                     of which they are a part. The relationship between the laboratory apparatus, the
                     researchers, the material, the discursive, and the virtual, is thus not one of
                     transition between multiple layers, or of a causal chain, but rather is a
                     co-constitutive relationship; they all produce each other, participating in one
                     another’s existence.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p12">12</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p12"> 1990s Laboratory Studies’ use of ANT and social constructivist models of
                     knowledge production, blended with the concurrent emergence of feminist,
                     cybernetic, and posthuman configurations of subjectivity [<a class="ref" href="#haraway1991">Haraway 1991</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#braidotti1994">Braidotti 1994</a>], signaled a shift from first-order cybernetic
                     models of the laboratory, where humans were observers and manipulators of
                     large-scale systems, to second-order cybernetic models [<a class="ref" href="#mead1968">Mead 1968</a>], where the actants within systems, including humans, are always part of the
                     system itself, and where the “bounds” of the system are
                     always under negotiation. Though <cite class="title italic">Epistemic Cultures</cite>
                     is generally considered to be the last “mega” Laboratory
                     Studies work from an empirical perspective — it synthesized over a decade of
                     comparative ethnographic research across multiple laboratories and continents —
                     more recent work in and around Lab Studies has continued its synthetic work on
                     the production of materiality, subjectivity, and epistemology in scientific
                     spaces. Feminist Science Studies and its subset, Feminist New Materialism, have
                     been particularly prominent in the decades since, including the quantum and
                     intra-active theories of Karen Barad <a href="#barad2007">(2007)</a> and
                     the multiply-produced ontologies of Annemarie Mol <a href="#mol2002">(2002)</a>.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p13">13</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p13">While there has been scholarship bridging STS literature with DH practices [<a class="ref" href="#boeva2018">Boeva et al. 2018</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#hamraie2018">Hamraie 2018</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#parikka2016">Parikka 2016</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#resch2018">Resch et al 2018</a>], much of this writing has focused on labs as
                     imaginaries and as spaces of material and speculative production. More
                     connections can be built between DH’s acknowledgement of the cultural qualities
                     of laboratories and Laboratory Studies’ examinations of the social and material
                     processes that practice those qualities into being. These connections include:
                     
                     <ul class="list">
                        <li class="item">An interrogation into methodological and epistemological disunity of
                           Science
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">The laboratory as a site of social construction of facts, and</li>
                        <li class="item">The co-production of laboratories, researchers, research
                           objects/subjects, and institutional legitimization
                        </li>
                     </ul>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p14">14</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p14">We want to highlight these potential connections for two reasons. First, we argue
                     that lack of attention to laboratory practices leads to the stereotyping of
                     scientific and computational practices by DH scholars. In turn, this
                     stereotyping reinforces hegemonic institutions that thrive on the constructed
                     neutrality, rationality, and unity of Science. It can also limit imaginations of
                     when, where, and how DH can intervene in and subvert hegemonic institutions.
                     Second, the social, subjective, political, and epistemological work found in
                     scientific laboratories happens in DH labs as well. The acknowledgement of this
                     work can allow for the reflexive proliferation of more diverse models of DH
                     labs.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">3. Producing Digital Humanities Laboratories</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p15">15</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p15">How does the construction of Science and scientific laboratories shape DH
                     identity and practices? How do DH Labs produce Digital Humanists as epistemic
                     subjects, and our objects of inquiry as epistemic objects? To begin, the DH Lab
                     produces and is produced by a network of scholars, practices, institutions,
                     epistemologies, ideologies, and cultures of STEM, the Humanities, higher
                     education, and society writ large. And although “analytic
                     cuts”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#barad2007">Barad 2007</a>] are part of the process of making knowable the
                     epistemic object of DH Labs, critically evaluating these cuts can help us to
                     understand how the epistemic subjectivities of DH researchers take part in are
                     co-produced through broader narratives about DH and Science.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p16">16</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p16">Though the genre of “defining DH” articles and essays [<a class="ref" href="#kirschenbaum2012">Kirschenbaum 2012</a>] has been criticized as “absurdly self-referential”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#raley2014">Raley 2014</a>], work from Laboratory Studies suggests that the
                     absence of these public debates does not mean that disciplinary boundary
                     constructions are settled. Rather, the lack definitional discourse is a product
                     of the “making invisible”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#garforth2012">Garforth 2012</a>] of the debates, interpretations, and legitimizing
                     and de-legitimizing practices that always occur in knowledge production. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p17">17</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p17">Rita Raley describes common attacks on DH as part of a broader criticism of the
                     metrically-oriented university, including arguments that “quantitative analysis is unthinking and its investments in ‘precise
                     measurement’ hopelessly naive; the epistemological certainty that
                     data visualization seems to offer is equally fantastic”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#raley2014">Raley 2014</a>]. While these critiques of quantitative and data
                     cultures are certainly legitimate, they also reinforce the social construction
                     of science as an interpretively naive, yet empirically neutral, knowledge
                     system. We can see some of the issues of this reproduction even in definitional
                     work that supports DH scholarship. James Smithies and Alan Liu have each written
                     about the usefulness — when paired with caution — of scientific and
                     computational methodologies applied to humanities research [<a class="ref" href="#liu2012">Liu 2012</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#smithies2017">Smithies 2017</a>]. Similarly, David M. Berry and Anders Fagerjord
                     write: “There is clearly also a danger for the humanities
                     when their work is seen through the optic of computational approaches.
                     Hence, it is important that digital humanities remains focused on the
                     research questions that are drawn from the humanities, even whilst working
                     in and through computational approaches”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#berry2017">Berry and Fagerjord 2017</a>, para 50].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p18">18</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p18">This position, that DH practices represent the “application”
                     of tools to Humanities questions, is a common one. However, in the co-productive
                     model of knowledge construction, there can never be a separation between the
                     methods we use and the questions we ask. Rather, they are embedded within one
                     another and co-produce each other. Use of these methodologies enrolls broader
                     institutional and epistemological apparatuses when defining
                     “computational approaches” or “humanities
                     questions.” As a case, we can take the Introduction to Jentery
                     Sayers’s DH course “Unlearning the Internet” at the
                     University of Victoria (2018). In the introductory course notes, Sayers explains
                     to his students that: 
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>
                            [This] is not a computer science course. The only
                           technical competencies I assume are that you know how to send an email
                           and also check this website. [It] is not about defining
                           “digital humanities.” We will treat digital
                           humanities not as a field but as a collection of strategies for
                           conducting humanities research with and through digital technologies. We
                           will emphasize techniques and practices over the use of specific tools
                           and software.  [<a class="ref" href="#sayers2018">Sayers 2018</a>]
                        </p>
                     </blockquote>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p19">19</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p19">Note the epistemological and identity work performed in this syllabus. The
                     descriptor of “not a computer science course” is
                     clearly not intended as a disclaimer about the institutional location of the
                     course, but rather as an epistemic claim. Computer Science is constructed as a
                     set of “technical competencies,” presumably
                     difficult-to-master ones, in opposition to, or at least orthogonal to, the kinds
                     of knowledge that will be valued in Sayers’s class. The claim of non-definition
                     of DH is followed by a reasonable frame of DH, but one that constructs DH as a
                     collection of practices rather than as a discrete epistemic culture. Finally,
                     the class is positioned as focused on technique and practice rather than on
                     particular digital tools; presumably in opposition to more
                     “instrumental” STEM classroom cultures [<a class="ref" href="#cordell2015">Cordell 2015</a>].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p20">20</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p20">The syllabus produces a particular construction of identity, epistemic
                     subjectivity, and disciplinary difference. This production enrolls a variety of
                     constructed facts, including particular imaginations of Computer Science,
                     internal narratives of the strengths of the Humanities, and an anticipation that
                     Humanities students will be intimidated by what they construct as heavily
                     technical work. These facts may be incommensurable with facts from another
                     epistemic culture. For example, despite the common association of Computer
                     Science with toolsets by DH scholars, it would be very outside the norm for
                     Computer Science faculty to frame their course as focused on “specific tools and software” rather than on “techniques and practices”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#malazita">Malazita Forthcoming</a>]. Similarly, the construction of Computer Science as a
                     technical or instrumental discipline also makes invisible the deeply political
                     and historically contingent dimensions of computer science research practices
                     [<a class="ref" href="#dourish2004">Dourish 2004</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#mcpherson2011">McPherson 2011</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#malazita2019b">Malazita and Resetar 2019</a>].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p21">21</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p21"> Constructing external disciplinary situatedness such as Computer Science as
                     overly technical and naively instrumental gives other,
                     “alternative” technical practices, such as DH, internal
                     social capital. It also serves to construct humanist subjectivity as
                     “non-technical,” and therefore erects barriers around
                     what kinds of educational or scholarly practices are imagined as practical or
                     possible. Raley, for example, dismisses a course or curriculum that “satisfactorily train[s] students in different modes of text
                     analysis… visualization techniques, and GIS, along with… literature and a
                     philosophical approach to informatics” as “difficult to imagine.”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#raley2014">Raley 2014</a>]. Ryan Cordell and Rafael Alvarado too argue that the
                     epistemic boundaries of DH are too varied to ever be counted as a discipline, as
                     only a select few polymaths could ever hope to teach or learn such a hybrid
                     cannon [<a class="ref" href="#alvarado2012">Alvarado 2012</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#cordell2015">Cordell 2015</a>]. The construction of a premade humanist or
                     scientific subjectivity thus forecloses the imagination of what can be produced,
                     sustained, and institutionalized through DH practices.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p22">22</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p22">Digital Humanities labs too can rhetorically reproduce the bounding of technical
                     method and interpretive inquiry. For example, Katy Kavanagh Webb describes a DH
                     lab as: 
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>
                           a space that includes technology such as multimedia
                           software and high-powered computers. Some hybrid spaces, such as Georgia
                           State’s CURVE (Collaborative University Research and Visualization
                           Environment) lab, also have visualization screens. Another important
                           aspect of DH labs is the types of meeting and work spaces they can offer
                           to scholars. Duke University even offers lockers where faculty can store
                           research materials. Most DH labs have a strong web presence that
                           showcases the projects that researchers have created. The websites vary
                           from blogs to digital collections (many of them created with Omeka
                           software).  [<a class="ref" href="#webb2018">Webb 2018</a>]
                           
                        </p>
                     </blockquote>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p23">23</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p23">Similarly, UMass Amherst describes their DH lab as “contain[ing] necessary hardware and software to facilitate the research
                     agendas of the DHI faculty”
                     (University of Massachusetts). Harvard’s East Asian Digital
                     Humanities Lab “exhibits ongoing or completed DH projects
                     that can be used as models and provides information about databases, tools
                     and methods that are used in creating these projects,” and “... is arranged according to the usual workflow of digital
                     humanists, starting from finding and managing data and moving subsequently
                     to analysis and presentation”
                     (Harvard).
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p24">24</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p24">Across all of these examples is the reproduction of a practical construction of
                     DH laboratories, and of laboratories in general: as physical or virtual
                     infrastructures that provide equipment or collaboration spaces for researchers.
                     Again, the technical method and inquiry are reproduced as separate: the lab is
                     the site of technology and method, the humanities researcher is the locus of
                     interpretation and inquiry. In this construction, the lab and its technical
                     apparatus becomes framed as passive; as a necessary holding ground for
                     technology and technique, but one that is ultimately a tool at the service of
                     rotating groups of researchers. Laboratory Studies scholars have shown this is
                     not the case. Labs are active spaces, their very presence on campus reshapes
                     expectations for research, the identities of researchers, the imaginations of
                     objects of inquiry, and the legitimization practices for making knowable those
                     objects. A lab space does not emerge out of an epistemically neutral position.
                     The choices to have a DH lab on campus in the first place, how to staff it, how
                     to outfit it, and which faculty and students are imagined as its audience all
                     contribute to broader constructions of scientific and humanistic knowledge work. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p25">25</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p25">DH labs are also responsible for producing their outcomes as
                     “knowable.” Labs must contribute to the legitimization of
                     lab practices and material products for particular epistemic cultures in the
                     Humanities. The “Kits for Cultural History,” products
                     of Sayers’s University of Victoria Maker Lab [<a class="ref" href="#sayers2015">Sayers 2015</a>], serve
                     as models for thinking through the construction of an epistemic object of DH.
                     Designed as enticing artifacts that allow their users to materially experience
                     media history, each kit contains incomplete reconstructions, archival documents,
                     hidden materials, making tutorials, and reflections about an extant or
                     speculative object. One of the earliest disseminated of these kits was a
                     speculative recreation of Victorian era electro-jewelry, personal wearable
                     technologies, which the authors describe as evoking a sense of wonder and
                     alterity in contemporary viewers. In writeups the kits are described as “foreground[ing] how the past is interpreted through present
                     conditions… Hidden compartments point to absences in the scholarly record,
                     implying more omissions exist somewhere beyond the container….”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#sayers2015">Sayers 2015</a>]. Jussi Parikka argues that the kits become a “disjuncture on a time-axis and [work] to enrich the sense of
                     the contemporary as an overlapping set of temporal layers.”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#parikka2016">Parikka 2016</a>, 85].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p26">26</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p26">However, if we assume a non-universality of audience and the general existence of
                     multiple, competing epistemic subjectivities, we must ask: for whom are these
                     kits built, and for whom do they do the critical historical work of interpreting
                     the past, implying omission, and disjuncturing time? The audience who can know
                     the kits as doing this work must be produced; the material arrangements of wood,
                     plastic, and paper of the kits themselves are not enough. The kits are
                     co-produced and situated by their write-ups and their journeys through media.
                     The subjects for whom they are intended, humanities scholars and students, must
                     be produced as epistemic subjects through the interactions of their education,
                     the objects, the field, and the documentary and critical writings about the
                     objects. The lab practitioners at the Maker Lab must be produced as epistemic
                     subjects capable of translating their historical and material negotiations to an
                     imagined external audience. The kits as material artifacts must be co-produced
                     alongside the validity of their interpretive operation. If any of these
                     productions do not occur, the kits do not function; at least, not in the way
                     described by the Parikka and by the Maker Lab. The “results”
                     of DH labs are more than virtual and physical objects. Labs produce
                     documentation, contextualization, and subjectification. DH scholars, DH
                     journals, and DH audiences are as much an outcome of laboratory work as any
                     artifact.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p27">27</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p27">DH Labs are therefore not just institutionally or materially situated; they
                     produce situations, and from there, situatedness. Researchers do not interact
                     with lab equipment and personnel and leave unchanged. Rather, researchers become
                     epistemically and subjectively reconfigured within labs, even as they
                     reconfigure and extend the lab. They are produced as a different kind of
                     epistemic subject capable of knowing the world in different ways. DH labs thus
                     operate not only as knowledge structures [<a class="ref" href="#knorrcetina1999">Knorr Cetina 1999</a>],
                     structuring the methods through which research is conducted and circulated, but
                     also as epistemic infrastructures [<a class="ref" href="#malazita">Malazita Forthcoming</a>], producing how
                     researchers ask questions and bound their identities.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p28">28</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p28">DH knowledge workers have constructed a particular onto-epistemic model of their
                     own scholarship and practice, one of the application of
                     “technology,” broadly understood, to humanities
                     questions. Acknowledgement of this boundary work is not intended as an attack on
                     DH; <em class="emph">all</em> knowledge practices create subjects, objects, and
                     boundaries. Rather, we want this critique to serve as an <em class="emph">opening up</em>
                     of DH practices, and thus of DH labs. As DH labs create situatedness, Humanities
                     scholars can use laboratory spaces and practices as modes of intervention across
                     diverse institutional, epistemological, and disciplinary contexts. These
                     interventions do not have to be constructed as instrumental, as in bringing
                     tools and techniques to “non-technical” spaces; nor as
                     evangelical, as in bringing the light of critical inquiry to naive technical
                     practitioners. STS argues that the Sciences should not be constructed as a
                     monolithic, anti-interpretive technical enterprise, but rather a collection of
                     diverse, at times contestational and agonistic, persons, networks, and knowledge
                     practices. What can a similar articulation of DH as contestational, diverse sets
                     of epistemic spaces open up? 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p29">29</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p29">Articulating a Disunity of DH alongside the Disunity of Science would impact both
                     the subjectivities of DH practitioners and the situatedness of the DH labs
                     through which we are produced. While the DH work this essay has thus far
                     addressed manifests in more textually-oriented Humanities programs — or, as
                     Kirschenbaum puts it, “in English Departments” (2012)
                     — DH could also be constructed as a vehicle for producing knowledge in
                     non-textually dominated humanities fields, or as tactical reconfiguration of
                     non-Humanities fields, including in STEM [<a class="ref" href="#malazita2018a">Malazita 2018a</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#malazita">Malazita Forthcoming</a>]. In the case of synthesizing DH and STS, this would
                     mean undoing some of the present boundary work which has positioned STS as a
                     separate, though allied, disciplinary arena from DH [<a class="ref" href="#liu2012">Liu 2012</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#resch2018">Resch et al 2018</a>].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p30">30</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p30">The Tactical Humanities Lab (THL) at Rensselaer is our effort to epistemically
                     and institutionally produce DH and DH labs as within the boundaries of STS [<a class="ref" href="#malazita2019a">Malazita 2019</a>]. The word “tactical” has for us
                     a double meaning. First, it is a recognition of the deployment of the term
                     already in DH, used somewhat flippantly as a way to “get
                     things done”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#kirschenbaum2012">Kirschenbaum 2012</a>] in the contemporary university. While we
                     certainly do not support the managerialization of higher education, we believe
                     that “tactical” in this sense can be more than just a way of
                     “accepting [our] parasitic relationship to the
                     host” of academic administration [<a class="ref" href="#raley2014">Raley 2014</a>].
                     Tactical-as-instrumental can also a way of making humanities and social science
                     research knowable to administrative systems, funding systems, and broader
                     cultural narratives of academic research. In this way,
                     “tactical” DH operates as an intra-institutional
                     translational platform [<a class="ref" href="#malazita2018a">Malazita 2018a</a>], in similar ways that
                     translational medicine practices have been constructed as ways of empathetically
                     bridging biomedical research and diagnostic practices with patients and the
                     public [<a class="ref" href="#wang2012">Wang 2012</a>]. The lab must always acknowledge our
                     situatedness in an engineering-centered institute, where laboratory practices
                     and technoscientific innovation are the major knowable genres for framing social
                     and political change. Our lab meetings consistently evolve into discussions and
                     venting sessions about being humanists and critical theorists in the context of
                     an engineering-centered institute. As such, the THL must be made readable as
                     legitimate knowledge practice to STS and Humanities scholars, and within the
                     framework of a technical university. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p31">31</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p31">Second, we use “tactical” in de Certeau's form, as the
                     practice of small-scale, everyday resistances to larger systems of power [<a class="ref" href="#certeau1980">Certeau 1980</a>]. Part of this commitment is disciplinary; STS
                     scholars tend to construct the field as strongly oriented with social justice
                     and normative approaches to scientific, technological, and knowledge practices.
                     We aim not just to change the Humanities and the social sciences, but to change
                     computer science, design, information technology, and biotechnology. This means
                     not only working with self-identified STEM practitioners, but also
                     highlighting–and holding accountable–the epistemic and political frameworks that
                     underpin disciplinary and technical work across STEM and the humanities. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p32">32</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p32">To accomplish these twin goals, the THL takes a bottom-up approach to DH
                     laboratory practices. Rather than having one or two longer-term projects
                     administered through the lab director, graduate and undergraduate students
                     propose semester-long projects to the lab, and are free to work individually or
                     in groups. Though projects can continue for multiple semesters, every
                     semester-length segment is structured via a particular development and
                     dissemination plan. The lab assumes no prior expertise in technical work or
                     critical inquiry; students and faculty share readings, run discussions and
                     workshops, and skillshare throughout the semester. The topics of these workshops
                     and reading groups vary depending on the projects pursued in a given semester.
                     The lab has no formal funding model or physical space — students and student
                     projects are funded through a combination of scrapped-together internal and
                     external sources, including bits and pieces of grants from the National
                     Endowment for the Humanities, Rensselaer-based internal
                     “accelerator” funds, faculty startup funds, Independent
                     Study credits, and preexisting institutional research infrastructures available
                     for supporting undergraduates. Our physical lab presence manifests through
                     distributed temporary spaces, generally either in a conference room outside of
                     Malazita’s office, or throughout various electronics, fabrication, and computer
                     labs on a campus designed for STEM students. In addition to enrolling students
                     from the Humanities, Arts, Sciences, and Engineering across Rensselaer, THL
                     members have also worked to embed themselves back into their home-frameworks
                     with the explicit purpose of bringing this attention to epistemic cultures to
                     research endeavors which may not have initially explicitly valued it. In “broadening and opening” our research output [<a class="ref" href="#golub2019">Golub et al. 2019</a>] we have embraced the shapeshifting nature of our work
                     as evidenced by this attention to the epistemic and brought this internalized
                     understanding of “tactical” knowledge production along with
                     us.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p33">33</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p33">The above may sound familiar to many DH laboratory practitioners — especially the
                     contingent funding, space shifting, and sweat equity involved in holding a
                     physically situated research practice together. Building momentum towards
                     continuous operation is also complicated by the term-to-term, student-driven
                     nature of the lab’s research foci. The structure of the lab leads to the
                     production of a wide variety of epistemic subjects and objects. The students and
                     faculty represent multiple disciplines, including STS, Arts, Computer Science,
                     Computer Engineering, Sustainability Studies, and Game Design. The project
                     topics range across critical technical education, data visualization,
                     reverse-engineering and hacking hardware, web-based media production, game
                     production, bioart, installation design, and furniture design. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p34">34</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p34">While the array of projects and disciplines can sometimes lead to a feeling of
                     disjointedness at the beginning of the semester, all projects are united by two
                     lab requirements: the projects must be oriented toward a social or political
                     goal, and the research teams should be interested in making their object
                     knowable by DH and STS audiences. Our collective starting point is that
                     “the digital” is not a set of tools to be deployed to get
                     social justice done. Rather, the digital, as a coagulation of material,
                     symbolic, and epistemic apparatuses, is entangled with histories of justice,
                     appropriation, resistance, oppression, knowledge-making, agonism, and power.
                     Similarly, the digital is not just a set of material and semiotic systems. It is
                     a pattern of thought that exists as cultural, philosophical, and material
                     practices before and beyond computational systems. As such, it is always
                     ideological, always political, always multiple. Most of our projects are in some
                     way oriented toward deconstructing the digital as an epistemic, ideological, and
                     material concept; building spaces that grapple with translating diverse ways of
                     knowing; hacking existing digital networks to privilege women, PoC, and LGBTQIA+
                     persons; and re-configuring when, where, and how “technical”
                     and “humanistic” work happens.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p35">35</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p35">The discussion of making a THL project knowable to diverse epistemic and personal
                     subjectivity is often the most compelling inter-group activity for lab members.
                     Not only does the articulation of a wide variety of activities “as DH” and/or “as STS” help
                     to build common identity for lab participants, it also gives participants the
                     space to reflect upon how knowledge is produced, bounded, and legitimized in
                     their own fields. This reflective action, ideally, can lead to reflexive action,
                     where THL members can not only better articulate their projects and their
                     impacts to outside audiences, but also imagine the broader array of facts and
                     results that laboratory work produces. In the following sections, we will
                     articulate two of the projects that have emerged from the THL, the <span class="hi italic">Arbitrary Waveform Generator</span> and <cite class="title italic">Politicizing DNA</cite>. The <cite class="title italic">Arbitrary Waveform
                        Generator</cite> sees students hacking, re-wiring, and designing musical
                     synthesizers to better understand the relations between mathematics, history,
                     culture, and sound lashed up in their construction. <cite class="title italic">Politicizing DNA</cite> uses “the digital” as a metaphor to explore how
                     DNA testing services are rhetorically constructing race and genetic risk in
                     object-oriented ways. Though each project is topically, materially,
                     methodologically, and disciplinarily divergent, each also aims to challenge the
                     epistemic boundaries of digital and non-digital objects, the split between
                     making and interpretive practices, and the epistemic subjectivities of STS and
                     DH knowledge workers.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">4. An Arbitrary Waveform Generator</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p36">36</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p36">The <cite class="title italic">Arbitrary Waveform Generator</cite> develops prior
                     theoretical work by Teboul, who, discussing the history of homemade electronic
                     music instruments, argues that “if most audio devices are a
                     new take on an old concept, then acknowledging lineage is ethically
                     preferable to claiming originality”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#teboul2018">Teboul 2018</a>]. What can we learn from a technical project where
                     the specifications are cultural and contextual in nature, rather than scientific
                     and measurable? Can we design a usable electronic music instrument that doubles
                     as a lesson in music technology history and open source research? With
                     contributions from Emily Yan and Caoilin Ramsay, computer science and electrical
                     engineering undergraduates at Rensselaer, the project explores the use of
                     alternative design parameters in the design and prototyping process of
                     electronic synthesizers. Synthesizers, widely construed, are the electronic
                     devices that generate sound to help today's musician develop their work. They,
                     along with their users, are responsible for a significant portion of
                     contemporary musical production. While most synthesizer designs follow a “Kit-of-Parts” approach [<a class="ref" href="#pernerwilson2011">Perner-Wilson 2011</a>], where a set of electronic components enable specific sounds at a
                     pre-determined price point, we are building ours to make users reflect upon
                     their own potential as artists, hackers, historians, and anarchivists [<a class="ref" href="#striegl2019">Striegl and Emerson 2019</a>].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p37">37</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p37">Why attend to social histories when developing a device that assists in musical
                     composition and performance? Audio electronics often combine otherwise
                     “obsolete” technologies with newer developments in
                     digital signal processing and integrated circuit designs [<a class="ref" href="#paradiso2017">Paradiso 2017</a>]. Modular synthesizers, introduced commercially in
                     the US by Moog and Buchla in the mid 1960's [<a class="ref" href="#pinch2004">Pinch and Trocco 2004</a>] now
                     operate in updated forms alongside software-based synthesizers, themselves
                     descendents of Max Mathews' computer music paradigm from the same era [<a class="ref" href="#mathews1964">Mathews and Miller 1964</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#roads1980">Roads and Mathews 1980</a>], [<a class="ref" href="#park2009">Park and Mathews 2009</a>]. These digital relatives
                     for live performance include Max/MSP, Pure Data or Supercollider. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p38">38</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p38">Interfaces that enable the side-by-side, coordinated use of hardware and software
                     devices are, notwithstanding their common origins, relatively rare and
                     expensive. All use proprietary code which makes them relatively expensive and
                     difficult to study. In these technical limitations, related to the historical
                     developments of related inventions, we see an opportunity for productive
                     cultural reflection. We acknowledge that the audio interface we are putting
                     together will encourage some modes of music-making before others. In wondering
                     what the “best” way to implement a cheaper, more open source,
                     more versatile and most “self-aware” way to do so, we were
                     drawn to two recent devices. The Bela enables a small Linux computer to process
                     many channels of digital audio with no noticeable lag [<a class="ref" href="#mcpherson2016">McPherson et al 2016</a>]. In complement, the arduino-based "arbitrary
                     function generator" designed by Lawson et al (2016) offers a template for an
                     innovative “multi-tool” of sound synthesis. Using the Bela
                     allows us to use Pure data, a visual programming environment for music
                     composition and performance [<a class="ref" href="#puckette1997">Puckette 1997</a>]. Pure Data is
                     relatively more accessible and user-readable than C++, the other coding language
                     native to the Bela platform. With those, we are able to interface any computer
                     connected to a local network to any eurorack-format modular synthesizer with a
                     user-editable and performable platform. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p39">39</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p39">Functionally, waveform generator is effectively a programmable oscillator.
                     Because of the physical properties of semiconductors and the history of
                     synthesizers, some waveforms are more common than others: the sine wave, for
                     example, is considered to be the mathematical basis by which all other sound can
                     be reconstructed [<a class="ref" href="#helmholtz1954">Helmholtz 1954</a>], whereas the square wave is
                     constructed as the basis of digital communication. These waves’ ubiquity in
                     electronics means they are also responsible for a number of the musical timbres
                     reoccurring in popular music; for example, a very distorted guitar approximates
                     the timbre of a square wave. We play with these norms and expectations in two
                     ways: first, by allowing smooth fades between any pair of those canonical
                     waveforms. Second, by implementing a wavetable, a memory space where the value
                     of each audio sample can be rewritten arbitrarily by the user, for the
                     generation of non-standard waveforms. The choice of coding our audio system with
                     Pure Data, which is almost as easy to modify as it is to use, is made in hopes
                     that future experimenters will feel invited to adapt the system to their needs. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p40">40</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p40">This practical and constructive process is complemented by a deconstructive
                     theory: a “critical and practical reverse
                     engineering” that highlights how different devices and different
                     abstractions of devices can be analyzed side-by-side to extract or represent
                     meaning from/in technical decisions. Making is here seen as a lossy type of
                     compression, because less can be retrieved from an artifact than the
                     intellectual and physical resources that have been put into it. History, then,
                     is a process of dealing with the inaccuracies produced in the decompression of
                     this lossy encoding. This dealing is deeply ingrained in the technological
                     archives dear to the project of the humanities. Here, perspectives from critical
                     readings of electronic music and electronic music technology force both a wide
                     construction of the text as including the technological [<a class="ref" href="#parikka2011">Parikka 2011</a>], as well as a reminder that what cannot be encoded
                     has a frictional relationship with text. The Arbitrary Waveform generator is
                     about rendering a multimodal archive operational as a space for lab-based work. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p41">41</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p41">To that end, Ramsay's work has focused on developing the circuits that allow our
                     device to interact with eurorack format modular synthesizers. A first stage
                     involved breadboarded prototypes, in which electronic components are arranged in
                     temporary circuits without soldering, and we are currently moving to a more
                     permanent “protoboard” stage for which the functioning
                     circuit is more permanently soldered together. Yan's work has consisted of
                     designing audio programs for composition and performance in Pure Data. These are
                     inspired by the features of Lawson et. al.'s original device (2016), that also
                     enabled a connection between software and hardware synthesizers but uses an
                     Arduino and a wavetable with high-resolution samples rather than function calls
                     to iterate the values of a waveform. Yan's software design allows the user to
                     select pairs of the aforementioned “canonical
                     waveforms” and either blend them dynamically, affecting timbre. In
                     addition to that, and a wavetable, we are also implementing a sequencer to
                     automate arbitrary changes of these oscillator settings. Teboul's work,
                     expanding from a role of mentoring the undergraduates on technical and interface
                     design requirements of each component, also consists of linking the team's
                     technical decisions to the musical affordances of the prototype, developing
                     documentation of each of these connections and framing them within a critical
                     perspective inspired by Rodgers and Sterne (2011) or Mills (2011) through the
                     extensive use of system diagrams and code commenting. In doing so we develop a
                     practical understanding of electronic music's technoculture [<a class="ref" href="#haring2007">Haring 2007</a>]. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p42">42</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p42">Group technical work as a method for history is both the concern of STS [<a class="ref" href="#boeva2018">Boeva et al. 2018</a>] and of media archeology [<a class="ref" href="#hertz2012">Hertz and Parikka 2012</a>],
                     but this is also where we build our primary connection to digital humanities
                     generally, and the THL specifically: by operating in the rarefied design space
                     of electronic music, we have a privileged avenue to talk about how arbitrary
                     technical decisions can or should be leveraged to impart meaning to our
                     political artifacts. This is why we complement technical experimentation with
                     critical and cultural research. Each homemade synthesizer is the local
                     reification of the large technocultural system [<a class="ref" href="#hughes1983">Hughes 1983</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#wittje2016">Wittje 2016</a>] of electronics and musical production, a fragment
                     through which we can see a partial record of these worlds and what they mean to
                     us. We see this project as offering something new in the context of the digital
                     humanities because although digital tools and associated cultures are an
                     essential aspect, the <em class="term">arbitrary waveform generator</em>makes obvious
                     that any advantage software and digital signal processing may be able to offer
                     in this context is deeply dependent on both the materiality of the hardware at
                     hand and the sociotechnical context within which it is used. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p43">43</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p43">Reinventing traditional parts of synthesizers in this specifically musical
                     context is a tactic for exposing the politics inherent in every prior instance
                     of these ideas. As such, we do not expect our final prototype to clarify the
                     rich history of do it yourself electronic music instruments through the design
                     of an “archetypical” or “Rosetta Stone”
                     device; rather, we hope to hint at the complexity of the practice of electronic
                     music, the hundreds of arbitrary or materially-derived decisions in influential
                     past devices as reifications of compositional ideas, and the potential for
                     future technical work to address its own supposedly apolitical nature. In other
                     words, synthesizers, because of their post-optimal nature [<a class="ref" href="#dunne2005">Dunne 2005</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#teboul2015">Teboul 2015</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#teboul2017">Teboul 2017</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#teboul2018">Teboul 2018</a>] offer a unique, variably coupled [<a class="ref" href="#perrow2011">Perrow 2011</a>] environment for us to make statements through
                     technical work. The modes of interaction with the device are the result of
                     wondering how material choices help challenge the “natural”
                     aspect of our traditional musical assumptions. Helmholtz's theory of sound and
                     of the sine as the basic building block of all complex signals [<a class="ref" href="#helmholtz1954">Helmholtz 1954</a>], is not just the premise for communication theory,
                     but also a significant portion of electronic music making [<a class="ref" href="#jackson2011">Jackson 2011</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#hui2013">Hui et al. 2013</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#hankins1999">Hankins and Silverman 1999</a>]; we are constantly aware that although biases can
                     be challenged in our theories of instrument making, it is in practical use that
                     power relationship are most re-established. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p44">44</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p44">We construe our arbitrary waveform as an ideological object. Wittje <a href="#wittje2016">(2016)</a> and Patteson <a href="#patteson2016">(2016)</a> made clear that the political underpinnings of scientistic
                     approaches to sound most clearly exemplified by Helmholtz' work have deep roots
                     in the scientization of acoustic and electrical phenomena in interwar Germany or
                     Europe. Keeping precedents such as those in mind, our work as a team contributes
                     to the slowly growing practice of synthesis as an explicitly political space of
                     experimentation, with the development that statements can be made with
                     technological decisions alongside cultural ones [<a class="ref" href="#sterne2011">Sterne 2011</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#rodgers2015">Rodgers 2015</a>]. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p45">45</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p45">This project sits at an uneasy crossroads. We feel the pressure outlined by Brian
                     Massumi in “On The Superiority of The Analog”
                     <a href="#massumi2002">(2002)</a>, acknowledging that ultimately we are
                     making a machine for still-analog humans and their perceptual fields. On the
                     other we are equally unsettled by what may seem as a contemporary focus on the
                     digital. This is visible from digital humanities to digital music instruments
                     (“DMI”, see [<a class="ref" href="#jorda2005">Jorda 2005</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#calegario2017">Calegario et al. 2017</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#magnusson2017">Magnusson 2017</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#armitage2017">Armitage et al. 2017</a>], the latter of which have come to dominate
                     contemporary instrument making dialog in academia. At no point does our project
                     indicate a clear preference for hardware or software, for computation over
                     critique or vice-versa.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p46">46</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p46">Our status as relative amateurs (this is effectively our first digital music
                     interface project, let alone as a research group) is viewed as a motivation more
                     than a hindrance: the technical issues at hand aren't more difficult than the
                     critical questions we are asking, and therefore we are able to avoid
                     prioritization based on comfort. Echoing the <cite class="title italic">Kits for
                        Cultural History </cite>
                     [<a class="ref" href="#sayers2015">Sayers 2015</a>], we hope to smash the archival and anarchival [<a class="ref" href="#striegl2019">Striegl and Emerson 2019</a>] together, picking up the pieces and documenting them
                     for future reiteration, offering a robust template and solidified framework for
                     a method in the process. In this work, textual commentary emerges as an
                     undertheorized mode of operationalizing both diagrams and interactive visual
                     programming software such as Pure Data. Inspired by this digital culture
                     technique of the <em class="emph">comment</em>, we are in dialog with DH and its
                     artificial boundaries: between analog and digital, between human and nonhuman,
                     between media archeology and platform studies [<a class="ref" href="#apperley2015">Apperley and Parikka 2015</a>],
                     between engineering and music studies, but always in <em class="emph">practice,</em>and
                     in service of<em class="emph">a functional result.</em>
                     
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">5. Politicizing DNA</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p47">47</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p47">The<cite class="title italic"> Politicizing DNA </cite>project analyzes how seemingly
                     objective scientific and genetic data has profound political and social effects
                     on current and future conceptions of race. With the rise of direct-to-consumer
                     (DTC) genetic testing, social conceptions of race are brought back into
                     question. By re-inserting the politics of science back into DNA, this project
                     aims to deconstruct the attempts at presenting DNA as unpolitical or neutral.
                     This project seeks to answer how race is constructed within these genetic test
                     kits by reviewing the mission statements, products, and classifications of
                     racial identity of direct-to-consumer genetic testing companies such as 23andMe
                     and the Genographic Project. The project takes a stance of active refusal: the
                     construction of DTC testing as a political knowledge practice rather than as a
                     material practice allows us to engage with DTC without subjecting our own DNA to
                     the laboratories that house and process these genetic tests, and the legal
                     policies that regulate these laboratories.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p48">48</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p48">Given our refusal to take and materially manipulate DTC tests, why are we
                     constructing this project as DH? DNA is constructed as informational in popular
                     culture [<a class="ref" href="#nelkin2010">Nelkin and Lindee 2010</a>] and in the laboratory [<a class="ref" href="#thacker2003">Thacker 2003</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#chun2011">Chun 2011</a>], both of which borrow rhetoric from computational
                     knowledge practices. These constructive practices are common in laboratory
                     settings, where scientific knowledge workers seek to translate their objects of
                     inquiry into information, and in so doing make the objects knowable by the
                     laboratory apparatus [<a class="ref" href="#knorrcetina1999">Knorr Cetina 1999</a>]. For genetics researchers,
                     this construction produces metaphorical, methodological, and ideological
                     assumptions, with the assumption that DNA can be read, coded, and re-coded, and
                     that the relationship between DNA, the body, and the environment is a discrete
                     and networked one, rather than a discursive and ecological one. Though these
                     assumptions have been increasingly challenged [<a class="ref" href="#bolnick2007">Bolnick et al. 2007</a>], they
                     have produced decades of research agendas and laboratory infrastructures,
                     including $2.7 billion in public funds dedicated to the Human Genome Project
                     alone [<a class="ref" href="#tripp2011">Tripp and Grueber 2011</a>].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p49">49</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p49"> As genetic testing rapidly moves from-and-through research labs to consumer
                     spaces, DTC technologies seek to enroll the public in biopolitical practices
                     akin to mass data sousveillance [<a class="ref" href="#nelkin1999">Nelkin and Andrews 1999</a>], packaging and
                     selling our genetic material back to ourselves. DTC testing services reconfigure
                     mass “data scraping” practices into mass “data
                     swabbing” practices. Consumers choosing to not take a genetic test
                     or engage with the broader apparatus of genetic testing are making political
                     decisions to deviate from the new normal of circulating and commercially
                     operationalizing genetic data. These choices intersect with gendered and
                     racialized systems of digital and genetic surveillance, including onto-epistemic
                     [<a class="ref" href="#barad2007">Barad 2007</a>] systems of classification, identity, and
                     belonging that structure the lives and digital experiences of marginalized
                     people [<a class="ref" href="#tallbear2013">TallBear 2013</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#mcpherson2014">McPherson 2014</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#noble2018">Noble 2018</a>].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p50">50</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p50"> Spearheaded by Rafeh and undergraduate researchers Paloma Alonso and Hannah
                     Lightner, the <cite class="title italic">Politicizing DNA </cite>project has thus far
                     centered the mediated constructions of DNA, race, and identity with-and-through
                     digital infrastructures. The <cite class="title italic">Politicizing DNA</cite> team
                     is comprised of women and women of color, particularly rare in an institute like
                     Rensselaer that is majority white and male. This intentional structuring of the
                     project team produces a unique situatedness for the lab, as it recognizes that
                     the positionality of the researchers in a lab co-constructs the kinds of
                     questions asked, the ways in which the epistemic object is bounded, and what
                     counts as legitimate discourse. That women and women of color are investigating
                     DTC genetics is particularly important, due to the history of exclusionary,
                     exploitative, and oppressive practices in medicine and healthcare [<a class="ref" href="#braun2002">Braun 2002</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#roberts2011">Roberts et al 2011</a>]. This type of politically situated lab structure
                     reinforces the research group's work of politicizing formerly depoliticized
                     scientific processes.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p51">51</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p51">Of primary analysis was the construction of the relationships between genetics
                     and identity through DTC’s public-facing documents. These documents primarily
                     included websites (including <a href="http://www.23andme.com" onclick="window.open('http://www.23andme.com'); return false" class="ref">23andme.com</a>, <a href="https://www.ancestry.com/" onclick="window.open('https://www.ancestry.com/'); return false" class="ref">ancestry.com</a>, <a href="https://genographic.nationalgeographic.com/" onclick="window.open('https://genographic.nationalgeographic.com/'); return false" class="ref">genographic.nationalgeographic.com/</a>, and africanancestry.com), but
                     also included archival materials such as FDA regulatory decisions,
                     Terms-of-Service contracts, and popular coverage of DTC tests in media. Public
                     understandings of the gene cyclically influence, and are influenced by,
                     scientific understanding of the gene [<a class="ref" href="#bates2005">Bates 2005</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#savard2013">Savard 2013</a>]. At the same time, the epistemic object of the gene
                     known by the public is a different artefact than the gene as multiply
                     constructed by the scientific community [<a class="ref" href="#nelkin2010">Nelkin and Lindee 2010</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#torgersen2009">Torgersen 2009</a>]. These differences include how scientific
                     achievements are promoted in the public as more significant or advanced than
                     stated in publications. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p52">52</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p52">These different meanings continue to disassemble the idea that
                     “science” is apolitical, or separate from social
                     influence. The public fascination with DNA orients the scientific community just
                     as much as the scientific community orients public fascination. For example,
                     when a lab does publicly engage with the politics of DNA, it is often done in a
                     way that leverages Enlightenment narratives of the public good of scientific
                     enterprise, rather than addressing genetic sciences’ history of oppression and
                     abuse, particularly of women and women of color. This follows the prioritization
                     of scientific research over the understanding of the political and social
                     meanings it has in the world for multiple epistemic subjectivities. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p53">53</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p53">Contrary to much DH research, the <cite class="title italic">Politicizing DNA</cite>
                     project employs close reading rather than distant reading to develop hermeneutic
                     analyses of the digital object of DNA as constructed through corporate websites.
                     The researchers weren't just tasked to look at language frequency or
                     presence/absence, but also to interpret how each company chose to publicly
                     engage with the intersections of race, identity, and DNA. This included both a
                     rhetorical analysis, how these concepts were deployed or not deployed in text,
                     and also a situational analysis, such as whether or not identity content was
                     included in advertising materials, terms and conditions, or legal documentation.
                     Each of these digital-textual formats are governed by different legal standards,
                     giving implied and explicit meanings behind the words companies chose to
                     use.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p54">54</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p54">Given the lingering presence of the “hack vs. yack” debates of
                     the mid-2010s in DH research communities [<a class="ref" href="#nowviskie2014">Nowviskie 2014</a>], the
                     lack of technical sophistication or use of manual analysis over programming may
                     lead to some scholars to construct <cite class="title italic">Politicizing DNA</cite>
                     as outside the bounds of DH. However, we argue that the project’s methodology
                     deeply engages “the digital,” deploying a rhetorical and
                     archeological trancing of a digital object across multiple digital media, and as
                     it intersects with legal apparatuses, identity, and materiality. After the
                     initial swabbing test kit that consumers receive and return to DTC genetics
                     companies, the entirety of the consumer-facing genetic test experience is
                     digital. The materiality of DNA has been transformed into a digital
                     experience.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p55">55</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p55">While Berry and Fagerjord argue that “the question of whether
                     something is or is not ‘digital’ will be increasingly secondary as many
                     forms of culture become mediated, produced, accessed, distributed or
                     consumed through digital devices and technologies”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#berry2017">Berry and Fagerjord 2017</a>, 2], the <cite class="title italic">Politicizing DNA
                        </cite>project provides an alternative critique of the humanities/technology
                     divide. Further, by constructing this project as DH, we are arguing that asking
                     whether something “is digital” is not a question of
                     technicity or mediation. Rather, it is an ideological and political question,
                     one whose answer enrolls an array of knowledge systems, normative concerns,
                     market logics, and institutional apparatuses. Claiming DNA as digital subsumes
                     it into a larger infrastructures of data processing and computational culture.
                     Similarly, claiming the analysis of DTC DNA testing and its rhetoric as DH
                     allows us to enroll larger systems of analysis and interpretation that highlight
                     DNA as a transitory object among wet and digital bodies.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p56">56</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p56">Lab work has thus far uncovered ill-defined terminology and unfeasible promises
                     of ancestry on these companies’ websites. The websites of DTC genetic test
                     companies do not explicitly discuss race, and instead use wording such as
                     “ancestry” or “population groups”. Our
                     results have shown how race and ethnicity are subjective terms exploited by DTC
                     genetic testing websites. This exploitation has been evident through websites’
                     ill-defined terminology and unfeasible promises of ancestry. For example,
                     instead of using race, the three genetic companies use the terms “ethnic groups and tribes,”
                     “populations,” and “ethnic
                     populations.”
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p57">57</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p57">Even though the companies don’t talk about race, DTC genetic tests are used to
                     confirm, deny, or discover racial identities. DTC tests have direct
                     ramifications among several groups of people, including white nationalists [<a class="ref" href="#panofsky2019">Panofsky and Donovan 2019</a>], African Americans [<a class="ref" href="#nelson2016">Nelson 2016</a>], and
                     Native Americans [<a class="ref" href="#tallbear2013">TallBear 2013</a>], engaging with popular
                     conceptions of what it means to be Black, white or Native. Incidentally, the
                     only website to explicitly discuss race was AfricanAncestry. In their FAQ
                     section of their website, they answer the question “Can a
                     DNA analysis identify my racial or ethnic identity?” with: “There is no test for racial identification. Race is a social
                     construct, not genetically determined. Similarly, ethnicity is more cultural
                     than biological” (<a href="https://africanancestry.com/home/" onclick="window.open('https://africanancestry.com/home/'); return false" class="ref">africanancestry.com</a>). Not only is it poignant that a DTC genetic
                     ancestry company provides this kind of answer that reflects scholarship in
                     social studies of science, but it is also interesting that the only company that
                     centers itself on ethnic identity also provides information on the social
                     construct of race. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p58">58</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p58">Though <cite class="title italic">Politicizing DNA</cite> is still in early stages, we
                     hope that our findings will contribute to the public understanding of genetics
                     by analyzing the accessibility and representation of genetic information as it
                     affects the public’s perceptions of genetics and race. The ultimate goal of this
                     study was to examine the portrayal of race and ancestry in DTC genetic tests by
                     asking how do DTC genetic testing companies classify people into different
                     groups based on ancestry, ethnicity, and race. 
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Conclusion</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p59">59</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p59"> Constructing laboratories as epistemic infrastructures that produce epistemic
                     subjects, objects, and cultures destabilizes current imaginations of DH
                     practice. While DH labs are often framed as semi-passive resource spaces, where
                     students and faculty can access equipment, trained staff, and research
                     infrastructures, we have argued that labs are instead epistemically active
                     spaces. DH labs produce the epistemic subjectivities of researchers, the
                     textures and boundaries of the objects made knowable by the lab, and the
                     material-discursive practices that make legitimate DH research. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p60">60</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p60">This reconstruction of laboratories, and of DH labs in particular, brings with it
                     epistemic opportunities. If the boundaries of DH work are produced through
                     particular imaginations of science and scientific practice, through imaginations
                     of the abstracted “user” of DH spaces, then the shifting of
                     that imaginative landscape can have tremendous impact upon the shapes and
                     structures of DH labs. These impacts may include alternative models of
                     laboratory work, alternative disciplinary spaces where DH work can be practiced,
                     and alternative objects of DH research. Alternative knowledge practices lead to
                     alternative epistemic subjects, new bodies of theory, shifting infrastructural
                     and institutional terrain, and may move us toward a more “radical, unrealized potential”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#posner2016">Posner 2016</a>] of DH. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p61">61</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p61">For the Tactical Humanities Lab, this potential includes the expansion of
                     disciplinary and epistemic situatedness beyond textually-based humanities into
                     the humanistic social sciences, cultural studies, and STEM. The THL is one
                     possible configuration of DH that could emerge, one that focuses on the
                     construction of the boundaries of technical and interpretive work, and on the
                     production of DH knowledge and subjectivity through technical work, written
                     argumentation, and labor practices. While this is certainly not the only form DH
                     could take when reading-through STS knowledge practices, and while there are
                     countless other disciplines through which DH could be co-constructed, we offer
                     the THL as an alternative to the tool/application centeredness that dominates
                     contemporary narratives of the digital humanities, and as an alternative for
                     imagining when, where, and for whom DH knowledge practices can happen.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
            </div>
            
            <div id="worksCited">
               <h2>Works Cited</h2>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="africanancestry">
                     <!-- close -->AfricanAncestry.com</span> 
                  “Trace Your DNA. Find Your Roots. Today.” Accessed
                  January 30, 2020. <a href="https://africanancestry.com/home/" onclick="window.open('https://africanancestry.com/home/'); return false" class="ref">https://africanancestry.com/home/</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="alvarado2012">
                     <!-- close -->Alvarado 2012</span> Alvarado, Rafael C. “The Digital Humanities Situation.” In <cite class="title italic">Debates in the Digital Humanities</cite>, 50–55. Minneapolis:
                  University of Minnesotta Press, 2012.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="apperley2015">
                     <!-- close -->Apperley and Parikka 2015</span> Apperley, Thomas, and
                  Jussi Parikka. “Platform Studies’ Epistemic
                  Threshold.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Games and Culture</cite> 13, no. 4 (2015): 349–69. <a href="https://doi.org/10.1177/1555412015616509" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.1177/1555412015616509'); return false" class="ref">https://doi.org/10.1177/1555412015616509</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="armitage2017">
                     <!-- close -->Armitage et al. 2017</span> Armitage, Jack, Fabio
                  Morreale, and Andrew McPherson. “‘The Finer the Musician,
                  the Smaller the Details’: NIMEcraft under the Microscope.” In
                  <cite class="title italic">Proceedings of the International Conferences on New
                     Interfaces for Musical Expression</cite>, 2017.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="barad2007">
                     <!-- close -->Barad 2007</span> Barad, Karen Michelle. <cite class="title italic">Meeting the Universe Halfway: Quantum Physics and the
                     Entanglement of Matter and Meaning</cite>. Durham: Duke University Press,
                  2007.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="bates2005">
                     <!-- close -->Bates 2005</span> Bates, Benjamin R. “Public Culture and Public Understanding of Genetics: A Focus Group
                  Study.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Public Understanding of Science</cite> 14, no. 1 (2005):
                  47–65.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="berry2017">
                     <!-- close -->Berry and Fagerjord 2017</span> Berry, David M., and
                  Anders Fagerjord. <cite class="title italic">Digital Humanities: Knowledge and
                     Critique in a Digital Age</cite>. John Wiley &amp; Sons, 2017.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="bianco2012">
                     <!-- close -->Bianco 2012</span> Bianco, Jamie
                  “Skye”. “The Digital Humanities Which
                  Is Not One.” In <cite class="title italic">Debates in the Digital
                     Humanities</cite>, 96–112. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press,
                  2012.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="bijker2012">
                     <!-- close -->Bijker et al. 2012</span> Bijker, Wiebe E., Thomas P.
                  Hughes, Trevor J. Pinch, and Deborah G. Douglas, eds. <cite class="title italic">The
                     Social Construction of Technological Systems: New Directions in the
                     Sociology and History of Technology</cite>. Second Edition. Cambridge: MIT
                  Press, 2012.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="bloor1976">
                     <!-- close -->Bloor 1976</span> Blood, David. <cite class="title italic">Knowledge and Social Imagery</cite>. Routledge Direct Editions. London ;
                  Boston: Routledge &amp; K. Paul, 1976.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="bloor1983">
                     <!-- close -->Bloor 1983</span> Bloor, David. <cite class="title italic">Wittgenstein: A Social Theory of Knowledge</cite>. New York: Columbia
                  University Press, 1983.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="bloor1999">
                     <!-- close -->Bloor 1999</span> Bloor, David. “Anti-Latour.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part A</cite>
                  30, no. 1 (March 1999): 81–112. <a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/S0039-3681(98)00038-7" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.1016/S0039-3681(98)00038-7'); return false" class="ref">https://doi.org/10.1016/S0039-3681(98)00038-7</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="boeva2018">
                     <!-- close -->Boeva et al. 2018</span> Boeva, Yana, Devon Elliot, Edward
                  Jones-Imhotep, Shezan Muhammedi, and William J. Turkel. “Doing History By Reverse Engineering Electronic Devices.” In <cite class="title italic">Making Things And Drawing Boundaries: Experiments In The
                     Digital Humanities</cite>, edited by Jentery Sayers, 163–76. Minneapolis:
                  University of Minnesota Press, 2018.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="bogost2012">
                     <!-- close -->Bogost 2012</span> Bogost, Ian. <cite class="title italic">Alien Phenomenology, or, What It’s Like to Be a Thing</cite>. Minneapolis:
                  University of Minnesota Press, 2012.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="bolnick2007">
                     <!-- close -->Bolnick et al. 2007</span> Bolnick, Deborah A., Duana
                  Fullwiley, Troy Duster, Richard S. Cooper, Joan H. Fujimura, Jonathan Kahn, Jay
                  S. Kaufman, et al. “The Science and Business of Genetic
                  Ancestry Testing.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Science</cite> 318, no. 5849 (October 19, 2007): 399–400.
                  <a href="https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1150098" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1150098'); return false" class="ref">https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1150098</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="braidotti1994">
                     <!-- close -->Braidotti 1994</span> Braidotti, Rosi. <cite class="title italic">Nomadic Subjects: Embodiment and Sexual Difference in
                     Contemporary Feminist Theory</cite>. Gender and Culture. New York: Columbia
                  University Press, 1994.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="braun2002">
                     <!-- close -->Braun 2002</span> Braun, Lundy. “Race,
                  Ethnicity, and Health: Can Genetics Explain Disparities?”
                  <cite class="title italic">Perspectives in Biology and Medicine</cite> 45, no. 2 (May
                  1, 2002): 159–74. <a href="https://doi.org/10.1353/pbm.2002.0023" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.1353/pbm.2002.0023'); return false" class="ref">https://doi.org/10.1353/pbm.2002.0023</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="bryant2011">
                     <!-- close -->Bryant 2011</span> Bryant, Levi R. <cite class="title italic">The Democracy of Objects</cite>. 1. ed. New Metaphysics. Ann Arbor, Mich:
                  Open Humanities Press, 2011.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="calegario2017">
                     <!-- close -->Calegario et al. 2017</span> Calegario, Filipe,
                  Marcelo M. Wanderley, Stephane Huot, Giordano Cabral, and Geber Ramalho. “A Method and Toolkit for Digital Musical Instruments:
                  Generating Ideas and Prototypes.”
                  <cite class="title italic">IEEE MultiMedia</cite> 24, no. 1 (2017): 63–71.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="callon1982">
                     <!-- close -->Callon and Law 1982</span> Callon, Michel, and John Law.
                  “On Interests and Their Transformation: Enrolment and
                  Counter-Enrolment.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Social Studies of Science</cite> 12, no. 4 (November 1,
                  1982): 615–25. <a href="https://doi.org/10.1177/030631282012004006" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.1177/030631282012004006'); return false" class="ref">https://doi.org/10.1177/030631282012004006</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="certeau1980">
                     <!-- close -->Certeau 1980</span> Certeau, Michel de. <cite class="title italic">The Practice of Everyday Life</cite>. Berkeley, Calif.: Univ.
                  of California Press, 1980.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="chun2011">
                     <!-- close -->Chun 2011</span> Chun, Wendy Hui Kyong. <cite class="title italic">Programmed Visions: Software and Memory</cite>. Cambridge,
                  Mass.: MIT Press, 2011
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="collins1975">
                     <!-- close -->Collins 1975</span> Collins, Harry M. “The Seven Sexes: A Study in the Sociology of a Phenomenon, or
                  the Replication of Experiments in Physics.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Sociology</cite> 9, no. 2 (1975): 205–224.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="cordell2015">
                     <!-- close -->Cordell 2015</span> Cordell, Ryan. “How Not to Teach Digital Humanities,” 2015. <a href="https://ryancordell.org/teaching/how-not-to-teach-digital-humanities/" onclick="window.open('https://ryancordell.org/teaching/how-not-to-teach-digital-humanities/'); return false" class="ref">https://ryancordell.org/teaching/how-not-to-teach-digital-humanities/</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="culturalcritique">
                     <!-- close -->Cultural Critique</span> 
                  <cite class="title italic">Cultural Critique</cite> No. 53, Posthumanism (Winter,
                  2003), pp. 72-97
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="dourish2004">
                     <!-- close -->Dourish 2004</span> Dourish, Paul. <cite class="title italic">Where the Action Is: The Foundations of Embodied Interaction</cite>. 1.
                  MIT Press paperback ed. A Bradford Book. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press,
                  2004.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="dunne2005">
                     <!-- close -->Dunne 2005</span> Dunne, Anthony. <cite class="title italic">Hertzian Tales: Electronic Products, Aesthetic Experience, and Critical
                     Design</cite>. 2005 ed. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press, 2005.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="eidin2004">
                     <!-- close -->Eidin 2004</span> Eidlin, Fred. “Ideology, Objectivity, and Reality in Natural Science, Social Science, and
                  Politics.” SSRN Scholarly Paper. Rochester, NY: Social Science
                  Research Network, 2004. <a href="https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=1963404" onclick="window.open('https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=1963404'); return false" class="ref">https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=1963404</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="foka2017">
                     <!-- close -->Foka et al. 2017</span> Foka, Anna, Anna Misharina, Viktor
                  Arvidsson, and Stefan Gelfgren. “Beyond Humanities Qua
                  Digital: Spatial and Material Development for Digital Research
                  Infrastructures in Humlabx.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Digital Scholarship in the Humanities</cite> 33, no. 2
                  (2017): 264–278.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="garforth2012">
                     <!-- close -->Garforth 2012</span> Garforth, Lisa. “In/Visibilities of Research: Seeing and Knowing in
                  STS.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Science, Technology, &amp; Human Values</cite> 37, no. 2
                  (2012): 264–85.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="golub2019">
                     <!-- close -->Golub et al. 2019</span> Golub, Koraljka, Elisabet
                  Göransson, Anna Foka, and Isto Huvila. “Digital Humanities
                  in Sweden and Its Infrastructure: Status Quo and the Sine qua Non.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Digital Scholarship in the Humanities</cite>, 2019.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="hamraie2018">
                     <!-- close -->Hamraie 2018</span> Hamraie, Aimi. “Mapping Access: Digital Humanities, Disability Justice, and Sociospatial
                  Practice.”
                  <cite class="title italic">American Quarterly</cite> 70, no. 3 (2018): 455–82. <a href="https://doi.org/10.1353/aq.2018.0031" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.1353/aq.2018.0031'); return false" class="ref">https://doi.org/10.1353/aq.2018.0031</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="hankins1999">
                     <!-- close -->Hankins and Silverman 1999</span> Hankins, Thomas L, and
                  Robert J Silverman. <cite class="title italic">Instruments and the
                     Imagination</cite>. Princeton University Press, 1999.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="haraway1991">
                     <!-- close -->Haraway 1991</span> Haraway, Donna Jeanne. <cite class="title italic">Simians, Cyborgs, and Women: The Reinvention of
                     Nature</cite>. New York: Routledge, 1991.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="haring2007">
                     <!-- close -->Haring 2007</span> Haring, Kristen. <cite class="title italic">Ham Radio’s Technical Culture</cite>. Cambridge: MIT Press, 2007.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="harman2011">
                     <!-- close -->Harman 2011</span> Harman, Graham. <cite class="title italic">The Quadruple Object</cite>. Winchester, U.K. Washington, USA: Zero Books,
                  2011.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="harvardeast">
                     <!-- close -->Harvard East Asian Digital Scholarship Lab</span> Harvard East Asian Digital Scholarship Lab. “Research
                  Guides: East Asian Digital Scholarship Lab: Get Started.” Accessed
                  January 30, 2020. <a href="https://guides.library.harvard.edu/c.php?g=608708&amp;p=4224591" onclick="window.open('https://guides.library.harvard.edu/c.php?g=608708&amp;p=4224591'); return false" class="ref">https://guides.library.harvard.edu/c.php?g=608708&amp;p=4224591</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="helmholtz1954">
                     <!-- close -->Helmholtz 1954</span> Helmholtz, H. <cite class="title italic">On the Sensations of Tone</cite>. Dover Books on Music
                  Series. New York: Dover, 1954.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="hertz2012">
                     <!-- close -->Hertz and Parikka 2012</span> Hertz, Garnet, and Jussi
                  Parikka. “Zombie Media: Circuit Bending Media Archaeology
                  into an Art Method.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Leonardo</cite> 45, no. 5 (2012): 424–30.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="hughes1983">
                     <!-- close -->Hughes 1983</span> Hughes, Thomas Parke. <cite class="title italic">Networks of Power: Electrification in Western Society,
                     1880-1930</cite>. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1983.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="hui2013">
                     <!-- close -->Hui et al. 2013</span> Hui, Alexandra, Julia Kursell, and
                  Myles W Jackson. “Music, Sound, and the Laboratory from 1750
                  to 1980.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Osiris</cite> 28, no. 1 (2013): 1–11.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="jackson2011">
                     <!-- close -->Jackson 2011</span> Jackson, Myles W. “From Scientific Instruments to Musical Instruments: The Tuning
                  Fork, the Metronome, and the Siren.” In <cite class="title italic">The
                     Oxford Handbook of Sound Studies</cite>, 2011.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="jorda2005">
                     <!-- close -->Jorda 2005</span> Jorda, Sergi. “Digital Lutherie: Crafting Musical Computers for New Musics’ Performance
                  and Improvisation.” PhD Thesis, Universitat Pompeu Fabra,
                  2005.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="kirschenbaum2012">
                     <!-- close -->Kirschenbaum 2012</span> Kirschenbaum, Matthew.
                  “What Is Digital Humanities and What’s It Doing in
                  English Departments?” In <cite class="title italic">Debates in the Digital
                     Humanities</cite>, 3–11. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press,
                  2012.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="kleinman2013">
                     <!-- close -->Kleinman et al. 2013</span> Kleinman, Daniel Lee, and
                  Sainath Suryanarayanan. “Dying Bees and the Social
                  Production of Ignorance.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Science, Technology, &amp; Human Values</cite> 38, no. 4
                  (July 1, 2013): 492–517. <a href="https://doi.org/10.1177/0162243912442575" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.1177/0162243912442575'); return false" class="ref">https://doi.org/10.1177/0162243912442575</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="knorrcetina1999">
                     <!-- close -->Knorr Cetina 1999</span> Knorr Cetina, K. <cite class="title italic">Epistemic Cultures: How the Sciences Make Knowledge</cite>.
                  Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press, 1999.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="knorrcetina2007">
                     <!-- close -->Knorr Cetina 2007</span> Knorr Cetina, Karin. “Culture in Global Knowledge Societies: Knowledge Cultures and
                  Epistemic Cultures.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Interdisciplinary Science Reviews</cite> 32, no. 4
                  (December 1, 2007): 361–75. <a href="https://doi.org/10.1179/030801807X163571" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.1179/030801807X163571'); return false" class="ref">https://doi.org/10.1179/030801807X163571</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="latour1992">
                     <!-- close -->Latour 1992</span> Latour, Bruno. “Where Are the Missing Masses? The Sociology of a Few Mundane
                  Artifacts.” In <cite class="title italic">Shaping Technology/Building
                     Society; Studies in Sociotechnical Change</cite>, 225–58. Cambridge: MIT
                  Press, 1992.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="latour2004">
                     <!-- close -->Latour 2004</span> — — — . “Why Has
                  Critique Run Out of Steam? From Matters of Fact to Matters of
                  Concern.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Critical Inquiry</cite> 30, no. 2 (2004): 225–48.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="latour1986">
                     <!-- close -->Latour and Woolgar 1986</span> Latour, Bruno, and Steve
                  Woolgar. <cite class="title italic">Laboratory Life: The Construction of Scientific
                     Facts</cite>. Princeton, N.J: Princeton University Press, 1986.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="lawson2016">
                     <!-- close -->Lawson et al. 2016</span> Lawson, Shawn, Ryan Ross Smith,
                  and Frank Appio. “Closing the Circuit: Live Coding the
                  Modular Synthesizer,” 2016, 6.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="liu2012">
                     <!-- close -->Liu 2012</span> Liu, Alan. “Where Is the
                  Cultural Criticism in the Digital Humanities?” In <cite class="title italic">Debates in the Digital Humanities</cite>, 490–509.
                  Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2012.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="magnusson2017">
                     <!-- close -->Magnusson 2017</span> Magnusson, Thor. “Contextualizing Musical Organics: An Ad-Hoc Organological
                  Classification Approach.” In <cite class="title italic">Proceedings of the
                     International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression</cite>,
                  6, 2017.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="malazita2018a">
                     <!-- close -->Malazita 2018a</span> Malazita, James W. “Re: Configurations — A Shared Project for Literature and
                  Science.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Configurations</cite> 26, no. 3 (July 11, 2018): 269–75.
                  <a href="https://doi.org/10.1353/con.2018.0021" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.1353/con.2018.0021'); return false" class="ref">https://doi.org/10.1353/con.2018.0021</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="malazita2018b">
                     <!-- close -->Malazita 2018b</span> Malazita, James W. “Translating Critical Design: Agonism in Engineering
                  Education.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Design Issues</cite> 34, no. 4 (2018): 96–109.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="malazita2019a">
                     <!-- close -->Malazita 2019</span> Malazita, James. “About – Tactical Humanities Lab,” 2019. <a href="https://tactical.wp.rpi.edu/about/" onclick="window.open('https://tactical.wp.rpi.edu/about/'); return false" class="ref">https://tactical.wp.rpi.edu/about/</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="malazita">
                     <!-- close -->Malazita Forthcoming</span> Malazita, James. “Epistemic Infrastructures, the Instrumental Turn, and the
                  Digital Humanities.” In <cite class="title italic">Debates in the Digital
                     Humanities: Institutions, Infrastructures at the Interstices</cite>.
                  Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, Forthcoming.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="malazita2019b">
                     <!-- close -->Malazita and Resetar 2019</span> Malazita, James W.,
                  and Korryn Resetar. “Infrastructures of Abstraction: How
                  Computer Science Education Produces Anti-Political Subjects.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Digital Creativity</cite> 30, no. 4 (October 2, 2019):
                  300–312. <a href="https://doi.org/10.1080/14626268.2019.1682616" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.1080/14626268.2019.1682616'); return false" class="ref">https://doi.org/10.1080/14626268.2019.1682616</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="massumi2002">
                     <!-- close -->Massumi 2002</span> Massumi, Brian. “On the Superiority of the Analog.” In <cite class="title italic">Parables
                     for the Virtual</cite>, 2002.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="mathews1964">
                     <!-- close -->Mathews and Miller 1964</span> Mathews, Max V, and Joan
                  E Miller. <cite class="title italic">Music IV Programmer’s Manual</cite>. Murray
                  Hill: Bell Telephone Laboratories, Incorporated, 1964.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="mcpherson2011">
                     <!-- close -->McPherson 2011</span> McPherson, Tara. “US Operating Systems at Mid-Century: The Intertwining of Race
                  and UNIX.” In <cite class="title italic">Race After The Internet</cite>,
                  21–37. New York: Routledge, 2011.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="mcpherson2014">
                     <!-- close -->McPherson 2014</span> McPherson, Tara. “Designing for Difference.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Differences</cite> 25, no. 1 (May 1, 2014): 177–88. <a href="https://doi.org/10.1215/10407391-2420039" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.1215/10407391-2420039'); return false" class="ref">https://doi.org/10.1215/10407391-2420039</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="mcpherson2016">
                     <!-- close -->McPherson et al 2016</span> McPherson, Andrew P,
                  Robert H Jack, and Giulio Moro. “Action-Sound Latency: Are
                  Our Tools Fast Enough?” In <cite class="title italic">Proceedings of the
                     International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression</cite>,
                  6, 2016.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="mead1968">
                     <!-- close -->Mead 1968</span> Mead, Margaret. “Cybernetics of Cybernetics.” In <cite class="title italic">Purposive
                     Systems</cite>, 1–11. New York: Spartan Books, 1968.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="mills2011">
                     <!-- close -->Mills 2011</span> Mills, Mara. “Hearing Aids and the History of Electronics Miniaturization.”
                  <cite class="title italic">IEEE Annals of the History of Computing</cite> 33, no. 2
                  (2011): 24–45.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="mol2002">
                     <!-- close -->Mol 2002</span> Mol, Annemarie. <cite class="title italic">The
                     Body Multiple: Ontology in Medical Practice</cite>. Science and Cultural
                  Theory. Durham: Duke University Press, 2002.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="molotch2003">
                     <!-- close -->Molotch 2003</span> Molotch, Harvey. <cite class="title italic">Where Stuff Comes From: How Toasters, Toilets, Cars, Computers
                     and Many Other Things Come To Be As They Are.</cite> 2003. <a href="http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/qut/detail.action?docID=214526" onclick="window.open('http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/qut/detail.action?docID=214526'); return false" class="ref">http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/qut/detail.action?docID=214526</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="nelkin1999">
                     <!-- close -->Nelkin and Andrews 1999</span> Nelkin, Dorothy, and Lori
                  Andrews. “DNA Identification and Surveillance Creep.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Sociology of Health &amp; Illness</cite> 21, no. 5 (1999):
                  689–706.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="nelkin2010">
                     <!-- close -->Nelkin and Lindee 2010</span> Nelkin, Dorothy, and M.
                  Susan Lindee. <cite class="title italic">The DNA Mystique: The Gene as a Cultural
                     Icon</cite>. University of Michigan Press, 2010.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="nelson2016">
                     <!-- close -->Nelson 2016</span> Nelson, Alondra. <cite class="title italic">The Social Life of DNA: Race, Reparations, and Reconciliation after the
                     Genome</cite>. Boston: Beacon Press, 2016.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="noble2018">
                     <!-- close -->Noble 2018</span> Noble, Safiya Umoja. <cite class="title italic">Algorithms of Oppression: How Search Engines Reinforce
                     Racism</cite>. New York: New York University Press, 2018.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="nowviskie2014">
                     <!-- close -->Nowviskie 2014</span> Nowviskie, Bethany. “On the Origin of ‘Hack’ and ‘Yack.’”
                  <cite class="title italic">Journal of Digital Humanities</cite> 3, no. 2 (2014):
                  3–2.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="panofsky2019">
                     <!-- close -->Panofsky and Donovan 2019</span> Panofsky, Aaron, and
                  Joan Donovan. “Genetic Ancestry Testing Among White
                  Nationalists: From Identity Repair to Citizen Science.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Social Studies of Science</cite> 49, no. 5 (October 1,
                  2019): 653–81. <a href="https://doi.org/10.1177/0306312719861434" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.1177/0306312719861434'); return false" class="ref">https://doi.org/10.1177/0306312719861434</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="paradiso2017">
                     <!-- close -->Paradiso 2017</span> Paradiso, Joseph A. “The Modular Explosion - Deja Vu or Something New?,” 13,
                  2017.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="parikka2011">
                     <!-- close -->Parikka 2011</span> Parikka, Jussi. “Operative Media Archaeology: Wolfgang Ernst’s Materialist Media
                  Diagrammatics.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Theory, Culture &amp; Society</cite> 28, no. 5 (September
                  2011): 52–74. <a href="https://doi.org/10.1177/0263276411411496" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.1177/0263276411411496'); return false" class="ref">https://doi.org/10.1177/0263276411411496</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="parikka2016">
                     <!-- close -->Parikka 2016</span> — — — . “The Lab
                  Imaginary: Speculative Practices In Situ.” In <cite class="title italic">Across and Beyond - A Transmediale Reader on Post-Digital Practices,
                     Concepts, and Institutions</cite>, 78–91. Berlin: Sternberg Press,
                  2016.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="park2009">
                     <!-- close -->Park and Mathews 2009</span> Park, Tae Hong and Max
                  Mathews. “An Interview with Max Mathews.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Computer Music Journal</cite> 33, no. 3 (2009):
                  9–22.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="patteson2016">
                     <!-- close -->Patteson 2016</span> Patteson, Thomas. <cite class="title italic">Instruments for New Music: Sound, Technology, and
                     Modernism</cite>. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2016.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="pernerwilson2011">
                     <!-- close -->Perner-Wilson 2011</span> Perner-Wilson, Hannah
                  Hannah Rosamonde. “A Kit-of-No-Parts.” Master’s
                  Thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2011.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="perrow2011">
                     <!-- close -->Perrow 2011</span> Perrow, Charles. “Fukushima and the Inevitability of Accidents.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists</cite> 67, no. 6 (2011):
                  44–52.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="pinch2004">
                     <!-- close -->Pinch and Trocco 2004</span> Pinch, Trevor, and Frank
                  Trocco. <cite class="title italic">Analog Days: The Invention and Impact of the Moog
                     Synthesizer</cite>. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2004.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="posner2016">
                     <!-- close -->Posner 2016</span> Posner, Miriam. “What’s Next: The Radical, Unrealized Potential of Digital
                  Humanities.” In <cite class="title italic">Debates in the Digital
                     Humanities 2016</cite>, 32–41. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press,
                  2016.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="puckette1997">
                     <!-- close -->Puckette 1997</span> Puckette, Miller. “Pure Data,” 1997.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="raley2014">
                     <!-- close -->Raley 2014</span> Raley, Rita. “Digital Humanities for the Next Five Minutes.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Differences</cite> 25, no. 1 (May 1, 2014): 26–45. <a href="https://doi.org/10.1215/10407391-2419991" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.1215/10407391-2419991'); return false" class="ref">https://doi.org/10.1215/10407391-2419991</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="resch2018">
                     <!-- close -->Resch et al 2018</span> Resch, Gabby, Dan Southwick, I.
                  Record, M. Ratto, and J. Sayers. “Thinking as Handwork:
                  Critical Making with Humanistic Concerns.” In <cite class="title italic">Making Things and Drawing Boundaries. Experiments in the Digital
                     Humanities</cite>, 149–61. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press,
                  2018.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="roads1980">
                     <!-- close -->Roads and Mathews 1980</span> Roads, C., and Max Mathews.
                  “Interview with Max Mathews.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Computer Music Journal</cite> 4, no. 4 (1980): 15. <a href="https://doi.org/10.2307/3679463" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.2307/3679463'); return false" class="ref">https://doi.org/10.2307/3679463</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="roberts2011">
                     <!-- close -->Roberts et al 2011</span> Roberts, Maegan E., Douglas L.
                  Riegert-Johnson, Brittany C. Thomas. “Self diagnosis of
                  lynch syndrome using direct to consumer genetic testing: A case
                  study.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Journal of Genetic Counseling. </cite>20, no. 4 (2011):
                  327-329
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="rodgers2015">
                     <!-- close -->Rodgers 2015</span> Rodgers, Tara. “Cultivating Activist Lives in Sound.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Leonardo Music Journal</cite> 25 (2015): 79–83.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="savard2013">
                     <!-- close -->Savard 2013</span> Savard, Jacqueline. “Personalised Medicine: A Critique on the Future of Health
                  Care.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Journal of Bioethical Inquiry</cite> 10, no. 2 (2013):
                  197–203.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="sayers2015">
                     <!-- close -->Sayers 2015</span> Sayers, Jentery. “Kits for Cultural History, or Fluxkits for Scholarly Communication.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Hyperrhiz: New Media Cultures</cite> 13 (2015). <a href="http://hyperrhiz.io/hyperrhiz13/workshops-kits/early-wearables-essay.html" onclick="window.open('http://hyperrhiz.io/hyperrhiz13/workshops-kits/early-wearables-essay.html'); return false" class="ref">http://hyperrhiz.io/hyperrhiz13/workshops-kits/early-wearables-essay.html</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="sayers2018">
                     <!-- close -->Sayers 2018</span> — — — . “Unlearning the Internet.” Unlearning the Internet, 2018. <a href="http://jentery.github.io/150/" onclick="window.open('http://jentery.github.io/150/'); return false" class="ref">http://jentery.github.io/150/</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="smithies2017">
                     <!-- close -->Smithies 2017</span> Smithies, James. <cite class="title italic">The Digital Humanities and the Digital Modern</cite>. London,
                  United Kingdom: Palgrave Macmillan, 2017.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="sterne2011">
                     <!-- close -->Sterne 2011</span> Sterne, Jonathan, and Tara Rodgers.
                  “The Poetics of Signal Processing.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Differences</cite> 22, no. 2–3 (2011): 31–53.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="striegl2019">
                     <!-- close -->Striegl and Emerson 2019</span> Striegl, Libi, and Lori
                  Emerson. “Anarchive as Technique in the Media Archaeology
                  Lab | Building a One Laptop Per Child Mesh Network.”
                  <cite class="title italic">International Journal of Digital Humanities</cite>, April
                  1, 2019. <a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s42803-019-00005-9" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.1007/s42803-019-00005-9'); return false" class="ref">https://doi.org/10.1007/s42803-019-00005-9</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="tallbear2013">
                     <!-- close -->TallBear 2013</span> TallBear, Kimberly. <cite class="title italic">Native American DNA: Tribal Belonging and the False Promise of
                     Genetic Science</cite>. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press,
                  2013.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="teboul2015">
                     <!-- close -->Teboul 2015</span> Teboul, Ezra J. “Silicon Luthiers: Contemporary Practices in Electronic Music
                  Hardware.” Master’s Thesis, Dartmouth College, 2015.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="teboul2017">
                     <!-- close -->Teboul 2017</span> Teboul, Ezra J. “The Transgressive Practices of Silicon Luthiers.” In <cite class="title italic">Guide to Unconventional Computing for Music</cite>, edited by
                  Eduardo Miranda, 85–120. New York: Springer, 2017.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="teboul2018">
                     <!-- close -->Teboul 2018</span> Teboul, Ezra J. “Electronic Music Hardware and Open Design Methodologies for Post-Optimal
                  Objects.” In <cite class="title italic">Making Things and Drawing
                     Boundaries: Experiments in the Digital Humanities</cite>, edited by Jentery
                  Sayers, 177–84. Minneapolis: University of Minnesotta Press, 2018.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="thacker2003">
                     <!-- close -->Thacker 2003</span> Thacker, Eugene. “Data Made Flesh: Biotechnology and the Discourse of the
                  Posthuman”
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="torgersen2009">
                     <!-- close -->Torgersen 2009</span> Torgersen, Helge. “Fuzzy Genes: Epistemic Tensions in Genomics.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Science as Culture</cite> 18, no. 1 (2009): 65–87.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="tripp2011">
                     <!-- close -->Tripp and Grueber 2011</span> Tripp, Simon, and Martin
                  Grueber. “Economic Impact of the Human Genome
                  Project.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Battelle Memorial Institute</cite>, 2011, 1–58.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="wang2012">
                     <!-- close -->Wang 2012</span> Wang, Xiangdong. “A
                  New Vision of Definition, Commentary, and Understanding in Clinical and
                  Translational Medicine.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Clinical and Translational Medicine</cite> 1, no. 1 (May
                  3, 2012): 5. <a href="https://doi.org/10.1186/2001-1326-1-5" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.1186/2001-1326-1-5'); return false" class="ref">https://doi.org/10.1186/2001-1326-1-5</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="webb2018">
                     <!-- close -->Webb 2018</span> Webb, Katy Kavanagh. “The Digital Humanities Lab: A Dedicated Space to Support Faculty’s Creative
                  Endeavors.” Library Connect, June 11, 2018. <a href="https://libraryconnect.elsevier.com/articles/digital-humanities-lab-dedicated-space-support-faculty-s-creative-endeavors" onclick="window.open('https://libraryconnect.elsevier.com/articles/digital-humanities-lab-dedicated-space-support-faculty-s-creative-endeavors'); return false" class="ref">https://libraryconnect.elsevier.com/articles/digital-humanities-lab-dedicated-space-support-faculty-s-creative-endeavors</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="winner1980">
                     <!-- close -->Winner 1980</span> Winner, Langdon. “Do Artifacts Have Politics?”
                  <cite class="title italic">Daedalus</cite>, 1980, 121–36.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="wittje2016">
                     <!-- close -->Wittje 2016</span> Wittje, Roland. <cite class="title italic">The Age of Electroacoustics: Transforming Science and Sound</cite>. The
                  MIT Press, 2016.
               </div>
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar"><a href="#">Preview</a>  |  <span style="color: grey">XML</span> |  <a href="#" onclick="javascript:window.print();" title="Click for print friendly version">Print Article</a></div>
         </div>
      </div>
   </body>
</html>