<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
      <title>[PREVIEW] DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly: </title>
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_screen.css" media="screen" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_print.css" media="print" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" /><style type="text/css">
        #mainContent {
          float: none;
          padding-top: 2em;
          padding-left: 4em;
          padding-right: 4em;
          margin-left: 225px;
           
        }</style></head>
   <body>
      <div id="mainContent">
         <div xmlns:dhqBiblio="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/ns/biblio" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" class="DHQarticle">
            <div id="pubInfo">Preview<br />Volume  Number 
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar">
               <form id="taporware" action="get">
                  <div><a href="//preview/index.html">Preview</a>
                      | 
                     <a rel="external" href="//vol///000417.xml">XML</a>
                     
                     | 
                     		   Discuss
                     			(<a href="/dhq/vol///000417/000417.html#disqus_thread" data-disqus-identifier="000417">
                        				Comments
                        			</a>)
                     
                  </div>
               </form>
            </div>
            
            <div class="DHQheader">
               
               
               
               
               <h1 class="articleTitle lang en">Interlude: Gaining Access, Gaming Access: Balancing
                  Internal and External Support For Interactive Digital Projects 
               </h1>
               
               
               <div class="author"><span style="color: grey">Matthew Kelly</span> &lt;<a href="mailto:mkelly_at_uttyler_dot_edu" onclick="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('mkelly_at_uttyler_dot_edu'); return false;" onkeypress="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('mkelly_at_uttyler_dot_edu'); return false;">mkelly_at_uttyler_dot_edu</a>&gt;, University of Texas, Tyler
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               <span class="Z3988" title="url_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;rft_val_fmt=info%3Aofi%2Ffmt%3Akev%3Amtx%3Ajournal&amp;rfr_id=info%3Asid%2Fzotero.org%3A2&amp;rft.genre=article&amp;rft.atitle=Interlude%3A%20Gaining%20Access,%20Gaming%20Access%3A%20Balancing%20Internal%20and%20External%20Support%20For%20Interactive%20Digital%20Projects&amp;rft.jtitle=Digital%20Humanities%20Quarterly&amp;rft.stitle=DHQ&amp;rft.issn=1938-4122&amp;rft.date=&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.aulast=Kelly&amp;rft.aufirst=Matthew&amp;rft.au=Matthew%20Kelly"> </span></div>
            
            
            <div id="DHQtext">
               
               
               <div id="abstract">
                  <h2>Abstract</h2>
                  
                  <p>This short essay describes the difficulties and impromptu workarounds that
                     emerged when using the video game “Minecraft” as the
                     central teaching tool in several professional writing seminars. More
                     specifically, the author discusses a key moment in the semester where students
                     needed to move between university and non-university technology infrastructures
                     in order to create multiplayer gamespaces that were accessible to their peers.
                     In narrating this experience, the author will demonstrate how a discourse of
                     “access” can be used to examine the oft-invisible
                     policies, procedures, and restrictions that shape the way we compose, circulate
                     and make visible digitally-native work. Furthermore, the author will discuss how
                     a critical emphasis on “access” can help teachers and
                     students better mediate the relationship between internal or university-supplied
                     technological infrastructures and external platforms when creating interactive
                     digital projects.
                  </p>
                  
                  <p>The underlying motivation of this essay is not to lambaste universities for lack
                     of institutional support nor is it to champion commercial organizations as
                     saviors for helping teachers successfully use digital platforms in the
                     classroom. Instead, the goal of this brief essay is to spur discussions
                     surrounding the following questions: how might we use issues regarding access to
                     better examine and navigate the hard-to-define boundaries that separate
                     university-sanction technology use from non-university sanctioned technology
                     use? How might calling students' attention to access refine the larger learning
                     objectives for Digital Humanities or DH-related courses?
                  </p>
                  
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               <div class="counter"><a href="#p1">1</a></div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p1"> In an institutional climate often guided by nebulous policies, procedures, and
                  restrictions shaping how students use digital technologies in university spaces, it
                  can be difficult for instructors to implement a streamlined process for creating
                  interactive digital projects. In many cases, teachers and students must rely on a
                  bricolage assemblage of third-party platforms, each with varying degrees of
                  compatibility and long-term support, when designing digital texts [<a class="ref" href="#eyman2015">Eyman 2015</a>]. This, in turn, can create scenarios where digital
                  compositions are left abandoned or rendered unusable on modern machines due to the
                  fact that they are not housed within stable, sustainable university infrastructures.
                  However, this is not to say that university-supplied resources for digital work are
                  universally lackluster or that third-party software is the only solution to
                  technology-based teaching issues. Rather, this situation demands that we rethink how
                  to navigate the complex interrelationship between university and non-university
                  platforms, especially when asking students to create digital projects using a
                  variety of proprietary or commercialized software in institutional environments.
                  This examination proposes that a revised understanding of access can be a useful
                  framework for revealing, critiquing, and even modifying the oft-invisible boundaries
                  separating university and non-university technology policies or infrastructures,
                  boundaries that might unintentionally stymie the inventive potential of
                  collaborative, interactive digital projects. 
               </div>
               
               <div class="counter"><a href="#p2">2</a></div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p2">The importance of access-based concerns became especially clear to me after a
                  near-derailing of a collaborative game session in one of my upper-division writing
                  classes. While teaching at the University of Pittsburgh during the 2015-2016
                  academic year, I designed several Written Professional Communication seminars around
                  the open-world video game <cite class="title italic">Minecraft</cite>. Students were
                  tasked with composing a variety of documents that mimicked real-world genres — such
                  as technical descriptions of gameplay mechanics and resource guides for new players
                  — based on their first-hand experiences with the game. My rationale for
                  incorporating a video game into a professional writing course was to highlight the
                  idea that professional or technical writers must often negotiate open-ended
                  interactions between other individuals (such as clients or customers) and non-human
                  agents (such as computer programs or physical equipment). In a parallel fashion, the
                  process of designing and documenting an interactive gamespace can mirror many of the
                  same situations or obstacles which professional and technical writers face on a
                  regular basis, seeing as game designers must rationalize the structural features of
                  a video game while also envisioning how other players might interact with said
                  features [<a class="ref" href="#greene2014">Greene 2014</a>]. The hope was that having students compose
                  documents that detailed specific gameplay mechanics and intended player experiences
                  would illustrate the rhetorical dimensions underlying real-world workplace writing
                  scenarios
               </div>
               
               <div class="counter"><a href="#p3">3</a></div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p3">A few weeks into the semester, I organized a “lab day” where
                  students would come to class with a copy of <cite class="title italic">Minecraft</cite>
                  installed on their computers so I could walk them through some basic mechanics of
                  the charming block-based world. One student had previous experiences hosting <cite class="title italic">Minecraft</cite> games with her friends and asked if she could
                  create a multiplayer server for our class, which would allow all of us to inhabit
                  the same virtual gamespace simultaneously as opposed to having students explore
                  their own single-player worlds alongside each other. I quickly gave the project a
                  vote of confidence and the student began setting up a server on her laptop.
                  Unfortunately, these plans stalled the morning of our class when campus wifi refused
                  to let the server-host configure “port forwarding” for our
                  multiplayer game. Port forwarding is a process wherein communication requests can
                  be
                  re-directed through a router or firewall in order to remotely access files hosted
                  on
                  another computer, thereby allowing users to create a private
                  network-within-a-network. Unbeknownst to us, university IT prohibited communication
                  requests to be re-directed in such a way that permitted remote Internet access to
                  another device on campus (which, in this case, was a student's laptop hosting a
                  video game server). Restrictions on port forwarding make sense from a security
                  standpoint because they can limit the threat of non-authorized remote connections
                  (i.e., instances where devices could be remotely controlled by malicious software).
                  However, the same policies that regulated port forwarding within university
                  infrastructure also prevented students from using their own computers to create
                  collaborative digital spaces for their classmates. To bypass these restrictions, the
                  student who organized our class server offered to relocate to a cafe down the street
                  so she could use their wifi to host our <cite class="title italic">Minecraft</cite>
                  session. For the remainder of the period, I played virtual tour guide for our class
                  while keeping in touch with the server-host via an instant-messaging feature within
                  our university's email client.
               </div>
               
               <div class="counter"><a href="#p4">4</a></div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p4">What I find most interesting about these policies and impromptu workarounds is that
                  they demonstrate how issues of access can reveal the invisible boundaries which
                  separate university-sanctioned tech practices from non-university-sanctioned
                  activities; the struggles of one student trying to make a multiplayer video game
                  accessible for her peers revealed the invisible policies that demarcate what is (or
                  is not) a permitted usage of digital platforms within university infrastructure and
                  the invisible line where a university's jurisdiction, so to speak, over technology
                  usage begins or ends. It was not until a student ventured beyond the confines of
                  university infrastructure that she was able to take up and apply a new configuration
                  of digital platforms in order to circulate an interactive digital project that could
                  be used by others. Put differently, the ability for a student to facilitate a
                  collaborative peer-to-peer classroom experience was entirely contingent upon whether
                  she resided within or beyond university spaces on both a virtual and literal level.
                  To clarify, I am not implying that our institution had devious machinations to
                  censor student actions. Rather, these teaching misfires highlight the difficulty and
                  necessity of coaxing internal and external (i.e. university and non-university)
                  systems to play nice when composing or distributing interactive digital
                  projects.
               </div>
               
               <div class="counter"><a href="#p5">5</a></div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p5">I used these difficulties as an opportunity to discuss institutional policies with
                  my
                  class and prepare them for our end-of-semester project, which tasked student groups
                  with documenting and designing a multiplayer <cite class="title italic">Minecraft</cite>
                  gamespace that taught users about the values or practices of a given professional
                  community. The rest of our semester was an experiment in playing the game of access
                  insofar as student groups needed to devise their own methods for creating, saving,
                  and circulating their projects among their peers. Several groups purchased accounts
                  for <cite class="title italic">Minecraft</cite> Realms, which is a subscription service
                  that hosts multiplayer <cite class="title italic">Minecraft</cite> servers for a monthly
                  fee. Because <cite class="title italic">Minecraft</cite> Realms handles all technical
                  aspects of server-hosting duties, students did not encounter the same technical
                  issues that plagued our lab day. One student group wanted to implement custom mods
                  in their project so they set up an independent server server with the understanding
                  that the server-host needed to be off-campus in order for group members to work on
                  their gamespace. In each of these scenarios, students needed to manipulate the line
                  separating university and non-university technological infrastructures by creating
                  their own impromptu solutions for cataloging their composing practices and making
                  accessible all the work they had invested in these projects throughout the semester.
                  As our class progressed, these workarounds became central features of student
                  learning experiences and several groups detailed the ways in which they negotiated
                  technical limitations during their end-of-semester presentations. In documenting how
                  they gamed access in order to gain access, students were able to explore larger
                  institutional procedures (one student talked about repeatedly installing <cite class="title italic">Minecraft</cite> on temporary laptops loaned out from the campus
                  library while her primary computer was being fixed) in addition to pragmatic
                  concerns regarding digital composing practices (a student who lost nearly all of his
                  progress because of software issues bluntly stated the he learned to “never update to the newest version” in the middle of a
                  project). Hence, issues of access operated as the proverbial canary in the coalmine
                  for identifying the invisible boundaries and policies that structure students'
                  everyday interactions with digital technologies.
               </div>
               
               <div class="counter"><a href="#p6">6</a></div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p6">Over the course of this brief case study, initial questions of access eventually
                  dovetailed into larger questions of digital archiving and preservation; workarounds
                  for making students' <cite class="title italic">Minecraft</cite> projects accessible for
                  prospective players emerged alongside strategies for preserving these gamespaces in
                  such a way that group members could continue designing their virtual worlds in a
                  consistent, sustainable manner. Despite the unique circumstances surrounding my
                  video game-centric teaching experiment, the intersection between access, archiving,
                  and preservation has been an emerging concern across digital humanities scholarship.
                  Universities have begun responding to these issues by creating initiatives to
                  support the long-term curation of digital work. For example, the Digital Scholarship
                  Lab at the University of Richmond goes beyond simply backing up files for
                  interactive texts in a static database. Instead, full-time DSL faculty coordinate
                  the development of interactive projects with their respective authors while using
                  a
                  variety of open-source platforms — such as MySQL, Omeka, and JavaScript — to ensure
                  long-term sustainability and broad accessibility of digitally-native texts. Projects
                  curated and hosted by the DSL include “Visualizing Emancipation”
                  (an interactive map that documents the uneven spread of emancipation during and
                  after the Civil War) as well as “Renewing Inequality”
                  (which visualizes how urban renewal projects during the 1950s and 60s led to the
                  mass displacement of low-income and minority communities throughout American
                  cities), both of which encourage users to see these interactive texts as outlets for
                  further research or teaching.
               </div>
               
               <div class="counter"><a href="#p7">7</a></div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p7">While the DSL is an excellent example of contemporary efforts to protect interactive
                  texts from the threat of digital obsolescence, we should not gauge the success of
                  this initiative based solely on the amount of resources and labor dedicated to
                  producing digital projects. Instead, we should measure the impact of institutional
                  undertakings such as the DSL based on the support offered to authors and audiences
                  of digitally-native work. That is to say, successful institutional support for
                  digital work can be evaluated based on the capacity for audiences across a variety
                  of spaces and settings to engage with digital projects regardless of institutional
                  affiliation or circumstances. Failing to circulate digital work beyond a small
                  handful of faculty members at a specific university would severely undermine the
                  on-going critical contributions of digital projects and their authors, seeing as the
                  scholarly or pedagogical value of many interactive texts resides in their capacity
                  to be actively used by other individuals. Consequently, the DSL's emphasis on
                  ensuring access to interactive texts for audiences beyond those in traditional
                  university environments offers one model that can help scholars and teachers
                  envision what constitutes sustainable university support when discussing resources
                  for digital work.
               </div>
               
               <div class="counter"><a href="#p8">8</a></div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p8">To conclude, initiatives such as the DSL resonate with the same themes underlying
                  my
                  students' <cite class="title italic">Minecraft</cite> projects in the sense that
                  questions surrounding access can operate as a framework for identifying,
                  negotiating, and even modifying the invisible boundaries that regulate the
                  production or circulation of digital work within and beyond university
                  infrastructures. The success of my students' <cite class="title italic">Minecraft</cite>
                  projects hinged on their ability to navigate the invisible line separating
                  university- from non-university technology policies and platforms in order to make
                  their collaborative projects accessible to their peers. Similarly, the success of
                  the DSL stems from its ability to streamline the curation, preservation, and
                  distribution of digital texts across university and non-university spaces, thereby
                  making interactive projects accessible to a wide range of audiences. Hence, the
                  small-scale workarounds created by students and contemporary large-scale
                  institutional undertakings both demonstrate how a renewed focus on access can help
                  us re-approach the obstacles that scholars, teachers, and students face when
                  composing digitally-native work.
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
               
            </div>
            
            <div id="worksCited">
               <h2>Works Cited</h2>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="eyman2015">
                     <!-- close -->Eyman 2015</span>  Eyman, D. and Ball, C. “Digital Humanities Scholarship and Electronic
                  Publication.” In B. Hart-Davidson, and J. Ridolfo (eds), <cite class="title italic">Rhetoric and the Digital Humanities</cite> , Chicago (2015),
                  pp. 65-79.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="greene2014">
                     <!-- close -->Greene 2014</span>  Greene, J. and Palmer, L. “It's All Fun and Games Until Someone Pulls Out a Manual:
                  Finding a Role for Technical Communicators in the Game Industry.” In
                  J. DeWinter, and R. Moeller (eds), <cite class="title italic">Computer Games and
                     Technical Communication: Critical Methods and Applications at the
                     Intersection</cite> , Burlington (2014), pp. 17-33.
               </div>
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar"><a href="#">Preview</a>  |  <span style="color: grey">XML</span> |  <a href="#" onclick="javascript:window.print();" title="Click for print friendly version">Print Article</a></div>
         </div>
      </div>
   </body>
</html>