<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
      <title>[PREVIEW] DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly: </title>
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_screen.css" media="screen" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_print.css" media="print" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" /><style type="text/css">
        #mainContent {
          float: none;
          padding-top: 2em;
          padding-left: 4em;
          padding-right: 4em;
          margin-left: 225px;
           
        }</style></head>
   <body>
      <div id="mainContent">
         <div class="DHQarticle">
            <div id="pubInfo">Preview<br />Volume  Number 
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar">
               <form id="taporware" action="get">
                  <div><a href="//preview/index.html">Preview</a>
                      | 
                     <a rel="external" href="//vol///000466.xml">XML</a>
                     
                     | 
                     		   Discuss
                     			(<a href="/dhq/vol///000466/000466.html#disqus_thread" data-disqus-identifier="000466">
                        				Comments
                        			</a>)
                     
                  </div>
               </form>
            </div>
            
            <div class="DHQheader">
               
               
               
               
               <h1 class="articleTitle lang en">The Laboratory Turn: Exploring
                  Discourses, Landscapes, and Models of Humanities Labs 
               </h1>
               
               
               <div class="author"><span style="color: grey">Urszula
                     Pawlicka-Deger
                     </span> &lt;<a href="mailto:pawlickadeger_at_gmail_dot_com" onclick="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('pawlickadeger_at_gmail_dot_com'); return false;" onkeypress="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('pawlickadeger_at_gmail_dot_com'); return false;">pawlickadeger_at_gmail_dot_com</a>&gt;, Aalto University
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               <span class="Z3988" title="url_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;rft_val_fmt=info%3Aofi%2Ffmt%3Akev%3Amtx%3Ajournal&amp;rfr_id=info%3Asid%2Fzotero.org%3A2&amp;rft.genre=article&amp;rft.atitle=The%20Laboratory%20Turn%3A%20Exploring%20Discourses,%20Landscapes,%20and%20Models%20of%20Humanities%20Labs&amp;rft.jtitle=Digital%20Humanities%20Quarterly&amp;rft.stitle=DHQ&amp;rft.issn=1938-4122&amp;rft.date=&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.aulast=Pawlicka-Deger&amp;rft.aufirst=Urszula&amp;rft.au=Urszula%20Pawlicka-Deger"> </span></div>
            
            <div id="DHQtext">
               
               
               <div id="abstract">
                  <h2>Abstract</h2>
                  
                  <p>The goal of this paper is to track the path of the formation of
                     the laboratory turn in the humanities and understand the
                     conditions, meanings, and functions of humanities labs. The
                     first section investigates three discourses that gave rise
                     to the emergence of a laboratory in the humanities: the
                     transformation of the humanities infrastructure within the
                     university, paradigm shifts in the social sciences, and the
                     expansion of cultural categories of innovation, the maker
                     movement (the proliferation of makerspaces), and the idea of
                     community. Next, the author presents a history of the
                     laboratory in the humanities and determines the shift from a
                     <em class="emph">laboratory as a physical place</em> to
                     <em class="emph">conceptual laboratory</em> after 2010. The
                     last section analyses five models for humanities labs based
                     on laboratories’ statements and operations: the center-type
                     lab, the techno-science lab, the work station-type lab, the
                     social challenges-centric lab, and virtual lab. The research
                     shows that the laboratory turn has emerged in the humanities
                     as a part of a wider process of the
                     <em class="emph">laboratorization</em> of social life, which
                     has been occurring since the 1980s. Next, the study
                     indicates the role of digital humanities as the driving
                     force behind building a laboratory space, which supports
                     situated practices, the collaborative, and technology-based
                     projects. The paper shows that the humanities lab does not
                     simply imitate the science lab but adapts this new
                     infrastructure for its own purposes and needs.
                  </p>
                  
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Introduction</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p1">1</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p1">Owen Hannaway defined a science laboratory as a place that “involves observation and manipulation
                     of nature by means of specialized instruments,
                     techniques, and apparatuses that require manual
                     skills as well as conceptual knowledge for their
                     construction and deployment”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#hannaway1986">Hannaway 1986</a>, 585]. A scientific
                     laboratory implies a physical location, material
                     instruments, equipment, and hands-on skills for knowledge
                     production. With the proliferation and diversification of
                     laboratories in city space, in cultural institutions
                     (libraries and museums), in the virtual environment, and on
                     the university campus, this definition seems difficult to
                     maintain. One realization of labs that resists this
                     elucidation is a humanities lab. A laboratory has emerged in
                     the humanities as part of their rich infrastructure that
                     includes a library and archive, the seminar and workshop,
                     the classroom, the graduate program, the conference, the
                     university press, the journal, the academic newsletter, etc.
                     These all have been and remained institutional forms for the
                     production of knowledge in the humanities. However, in
                     recent years, we have observed how the present forms of
                     infrastructure have been renamed “laboratories”: a
                     library’s reading room at Yale University Library has been
                     redesigned as the Franke Family Digital Humanities
                     Laboratory, the University of Arizona College of Humanities
                     has launched a new set of courses as the Humanities Lab, and
                     research groups and seminars have been called a
                     “laboratory”, for instance, Representing
                     Migration Humanities Lab in the English Department at Duke
                     University. The humanities labs have been built upon
                     different types of existing infrastructure giving rise to
                     new forms of their realization and interpretation. They
                     include situated and virtual digital humanities labs as well
                     as non-digital, seminar- and project-based humanities labs. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p2">2</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p2">In this essay, I argue thus that the idea of a laboratory has
                     been expanded and altered by social initiatives, such as
                     library creative spaces, makerspaces, and hackathons. A
                     laboratory goes beyond the notion of a physical place
                     dedicated to scientific exploration, becoming, instead, a
                     widely understood <em class="emph">project</em> (lab as concept,
                     initiative, and program) focused on “labbing problems”
                     (the approach to solve problems by applying the practices of
                     labs; see more [<a class="ref" href="#kieboom2014">Kieboom 2014</a>]). Seen as a
                     <em class="term">project</em>, it insinuates that society is,
                     in a certain sense, in a <em class="term">projection state</em>,
                     seeking new ways to tackle local and global challenges. The
                     shift from a <em class="emph"> laboratory as a physical location</em>
                     to <em class="term">conceptual laboratory </em>is thus crucial for
                     the discussion of a new cultural paradigm. Referring to
                     Thomas S. Kuhn’s paradigm concept [<a class="ref" href="#kuhn1996">Kuhn 1996</a>],
                     the laboratory turn entails fundamental changes in the
                     practices and function of the humanities at large. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p3">3</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p3">The purpose of this article is to track the path of the formation
                     of the laboratory turn in the humanities and understand the
                     conditions, meanings, and functions of humanities labs
                     situated in North America, North-Western Europe, and
                     Australia. In the first part of the article, I analyse
                     briefly three discourses that gave rise to the emergence of
                     a laboratory in the humanities: the transformation of the
                     humanities infrastructure within the university, paradigm
                     shifts in the social sciences, and the expansion of cultural
                     categories of innovation, the maker movement, and the notion
                     of community. Next, I present a history of the laboratory in
                     the humanities and examine a wide range of application of
                     the term “laboratory” to the humanities that cover
                     institutional and technology-based labs (physical and
                     virtual spaces engaging digital tools and technologies) and
                     conceptual, non-digital labs (entities and projects that
                     call themselves “labs” and don’t have an explicitly
                     digital component). Drawing on this analysis, I indicate
                     five models for humanities labs based on laboratories’
                     statements and operations: the center-type lab, the
                     techno-science lab, the work station-type lab, the social
                     challenges-centric lab, and virtual lab. These five types of
                     laboratories grew out of various origins and discourses. The
                     goal is thus to grasp the complex landscape of the
                     humanities labs, comprehend their functions, and reflect on
                     their development and features. The result section presents
                     the main findings of the research related to the emergence
                     of the laboratory turn, the uniqueness of the humanities
                     labs, and the implications of labs for the positioning of
                     the humanities both within and outside of academia. 
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Three Discourses of the Laboratory Turn</h1>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">Infrastructure Changes in the Humanities </h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p4">4</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p4">By looking at the history of the humanities, we can
                        discern moments of significant shifts occurring at
                        the time of cultural, social, and economic changes.
                        Each significant moment in the history of higher
                        education — the beginning of the twentieth century,
                        the 1960s/1970s, the 1980s/1990s, and 2007/2008 — is
                        hailed as a transformation period for the humanities
                        (see more about the history of university and
                        humanities: e.g., [<a class="ref" href="#b%C3%A9rub%C3%A91995">Bérubé et al. 1995</a>]
                        [<a class="ref" href="#readings1996">Readings 1996</a>]
                        [<a class="ref" href="#kerr2001">Kerr 2001</a>]
                        [<a class="ref" href="#klein2005">Klein 2005</a>]
                        [<a class="ref" href="#donoghue2008">Donoghue 2008</a>]
                        [<a class="ref" href="#gottschall2008">Gottschall 2008</a>]
                        [<a class="ref" href="#kagan2009">Kagan 2009</a>]
                        [<a class="ref" href="#wissema2009">Wissema 2009</a>]
                        [<a class="ref" href="#collini2012">Collini 2012</a>]
                        [<a class="ref" href="#bod2013">Bod 2013</a>]
                        [<a class="ref" href="#jay2014">Jay 2014</a>]). The discipline is seen as
                        a reactive field seeking to adapt to new conditions
                        and needs. One method which can be used to reimagine
                        and strengthen the humanities is institutional
                        change that entails new organizational structures
                        and, alongside these structures, new research
                        practices. Here, I outline briefly the
                        infrastructural transformations which have been
                        taking place in the U.S. since the 1980s/1990s.
                        However, prior to doing so, it is worth recalling
                        the most significant institutional change which
                        occurred in the nineteenth century.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p5">5</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p5">At that time, the humanities were under the influence of
                        the growing scientification of knowledge. The
                        humanities were strongly engaged in precise and
                        analytical research typical for scientific
                        discourses. As Julie Thompson Klein describes it,
                        “The tendency toward
                        painstaking research and minute methodology became
                        as evident in historiography as in science. The
                        humanist’s equivalent of the laboratory was
                        analytic abstraction, reinforced by description,
                        classification, comparison, and compilation. Like
                        laboratory specimens, humanistic objects could be
                        manipulated, dissected, and embalmed; measured,
                        counted, and calibrated; and subjected to precise
                        methodologies”
                        [<a class="ref" href="#klein2005">Klein 2005</a>, 28]. In a certain
                        metaphorical sense, the scientific laboratory was
                        the first place in which humanistic research
                        determined its methodology and infrastructure. At
                        the beginning of the twentieth century, the
                        university developed the modern system of
                        disciplinarity, which consequently contributed to
                        the independence of the humanities discipline. The
                        moment of separation of the humanities from science
                        meant that the humanities could shape the
                        discipline’s own methodology. This new independence
                        of the humanities and the building of the
                        discipline’s own physical place became a key moment
                        in the history of the humanities. Departing from a
                        <em class="term">laboratory methodology</em> was
                        accompanied by moving from a metaphorical
                        <em class="term">laboratory</em> towards an office and a
                        library: spaces that for a long time served as the
                        main places for humanities research.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p6">6</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p6">Significant changes occurred in the 1980s as a result of
                        the transformations in the academy. The phenomenon
                        of mass universities, the weakening of disciplinary
                        boundaries, and expanding globalization and
                        corporatization led to a crisis in universities in
                        the 1990s [e.g., <a href="#b%C3%A9rub%C3%A91995">Bérubé et
                           al. 1995</a>, <a href="#readings1996">Readings 1996</a>]. This crisis rhetoric has
                        started to penetrate any discussion about the
                        university, which is attacked for its
                        corporatization and ignoring social problems, as
                        well as the state of the humanities, which is
                        accused of being unprofitable and impractical. Under
                        these conditions, the humanities were transforming
                        gradually into an interdisciplinary field, engaged
                        in sociological, political, cultural, and feminist
                        discourses. The shift towards inter- and
                        transdisciplinary practices and social engagement
                        was accompanied by the symbolic gesture of moving
                        the humanities “beyond the walls
                        of the office” into the public domain. The
                        humanities moved out of their usual spaces — the
                        office and the library — into a new territory — the
                        center — to intensify interdisciplinarity and public
                        engagement. The implementation of new practices was
                        thus reinforced by institutional changes.
                        Consequently, since the 1980s, the humanities have
                        established many centres, aiming to foster
                        interdisciplinarity, build bridges with the medical,
                        technical, and natural sciences, and create a common
                        space for the university and the local community
                        [<a class="ref" href="#klein2005">Klein 2005</a>, 76]. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p7">7</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p7">Next to the interdisciplinary research center, a new unit
                        emerged with a focus on computing in the humanities.
                        This center underpinned the development of
                        humanities computing, renamed the digital humanities
                        in the twentieth-first century. It played the role
                        of a work station equipped with computers and other
                        devices, gathering in the same place humanists,
                        computer scientists, and programmers. However, the
                        computing center was more than a physical work
                        space; it was a significant ground for building new
                        practices engaged in manipulating complex digital
                        analysis tools and applying computing techniques. To
                        advance computing within humanities practices, the
                        discipline “required
                        institutional investment in an entirely different
                        infrastructure of courseware specialists, on a
                        large scale and at an urgent pace”
                        [<a class="ref" href="#flanders2002">Flanders et al. 2002</a>, 379]. These
                        infrastructural changes were necessary in order to
                        express these new practices within the humanities
                        and, along with that, the new function and place of
                        the humanities in the larger institutional arena.
                        Therefore, the center played an important role in
                        restructuring the humanities within the university
                        as well as reconceptualizing the field as a meeting
                        place for interdisciplinary researchers and the
                        local community.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p8">8</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p8">The university entered the twenty-first century along
                        with the accelerating power of technology, the
                        emerging cyberinfrastructure, and intensifying
                        globalization and internationalization. The
                        university of the twenty-first century is an
                        economically-driven institution centred on applied,
                        profitable, and competitive research and training
                        students in order to provide them with practical and
                        useful skills. Based on J. G. Wissema’s
                        considerations of the third generation university,
                        the academy of the twenty-first century is
                        distinguished by seeking alternative funding for
                        cutting-edge scientific research, intertwining the
                        two worlds of academic and industrial research,
                        operating in an internationally competitive market,
                        and the commercialisation of knowledge [<a class="ref" href="#wissema2009">Wissema 2009</a>, 31–2]. These
                        technological, economic, and academic conditions
                        have affected the humanities, which, particularly
                        after 2007, entered a state of crisis. The
                        humanities were seen as unproductive and out of
                        touch with contemporary science and the technology
                        culture, leading consequently to a decline in
                        funding, reduction in the number of majors, and
                        shrinking job market. Under these conditions, the
                        humanities sought to find a strategy with which to
                        reinforce their position. One of the implementations
                        of the “tactical
                        humanities”
                        [<a class="ref" href="#pawlicka2017">Pawlicka 2017</a>] is a “scientification of the
                        humanities”
                        [<a class="ref" href="#stratilatis2014">Stratilatis 2014</a>], i.e., moving the
                        humanities closer to the sciences [<a class="ref" href="#gottschall2008">Gottschall 2008</a>]. The process of the
                        scientification of the humanities has taken
                        different forms, including the use of new research
                        data and applied methodologies (qualitative methods,
                        data mining), new research practices (collaboration,
                        experimentation), new methods of evaluating research
                        (parameterization, falsifiability, the ranking
                        system of universities), as well as reconceiving
                        institutions (forming laboratories). 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p9">9</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p9">Consequently, the humanities took a step towards
                        revamping their infrastructure, aimed at fostering
                        and enhancing growing computational, collaborative,
                        and interdisciplinary practices. In this light,
                        drawing on Amy E. Earhart’s reflections, a
                        laboratory emerged in the humanities discipline as
                        “more than a space, but a
                        symbol of our hope”
                        [<a class="ref" href="#earhart2015">Earhart 2015</a>, 399]. It became a
                        new institutional structure that was supposed to
                        fuel the development of the humanities with new
                        working models and research practices. The
                        laboratory was intended to work as a driving force
                        to develop a new model of the humanities based on
                        collaboration, partnership, interdisciplinarity,
                        situated practices, technology-focused work, and
                        alternative, empirical education. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p10">10</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p10">The laboratory idea was thus applied to the humanities
                        field in response to its structural crisis; the
                        existing infrastructure (offices, library, seminars)
                        was insufficient to meet contemporary scholars
                        needs, such as advancing collaborative and
                        interdisciplinary research and fostering frequent
                        meetings and interaction [e.g., <a href="#hiatt2005">Hiatt 2005</a>, <a href="#joselow2016">Joselow 2016</a>, <a href="#breithaupt2017">Breithaupt 2017</a>].
                        Therefore, a lab was not only seen as a new
                        institutional unit for the humanities but also as a
                        conceptual model for conducting research embedded
                        and entailed in a laboratory’s set of practices. In
                        “Designing a Lab in the
                        Humanities”
                        [<a class="ref" href="#breithaupt2017">Breithaupt 2017</a>], Fritz Breithaupt
                        described his experience in creating the
                        Experimental Humanities Lab at Indiana University,
                        Bloomington in 2015, which arose from simple weekly
                        meetings that the students called “lab
                        meetings”. “Sure, we had
                        done several joint presentations and written some
                        small articles, with more pending. But was this a
                        lab?”; Breithaupt’s striking question shows
                        that firstly, the concept of the humanities lab is
                        still far from a clear definition, and, secondly,
                        that the lab idea grows out of the simple necessity
                        of frequent meetings and conversations as well as
                        the need to work together instead of remaining
                        isolated in offices. The term “lab” is thus used to
                        imply specific values embedded in a particular place
                        or initiative. However, this tactical naming
                        strategy doesn’t necessarily transparently disclose
                        the actual workings of knowledge production.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p11">11</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p11">The impulse to establish laboratories in the humanities
                        is also related strongly to the utilization of
                        technology in research projects. Following the
                        report of the American Council of Learned Societies
                        Commission on Cyberinfrastructure for the Humanities
                        and Social Sciences, “Our
                        Cultural Commonwealth”, we can see that
                        physical laboratories have been established as a
                        place for facilitating new research practices
                        (collaboration, experimentation, and
                        interdisciplinarity), advocating technological
                        innovation, and developing a robust
                        cyberinfrastructure [<a class="ref" href="#commonwealth2006">Our Cultural Commonwealth 2006</a>, 29]. A laboratory entails physical
                        situatedness, i.e., work is performed in a
                        particular place and context. Traditional models of
                        humanistic research involve work in an office, a
                        library, or at home since it is not attached to
                        place and does not demand any particular equipment
                        and devices. In contrast to this model, digital
                        humanities require equipment, tools, and software
                        that are accumulated and provided, physically and
                        through licenses, in one space. This place gathers
                        people from different disciplines and institutions:
                        programmers, engineers, librarians, curators, and
                        archivists. It becomes a work space for
                        collaborative, interdisciplinary, and
                        technology-based research. Thus, humanities research
                        has been transformed from placeless and isolated
                        work into the collaborative and situated practices
                        of the digital humanities. As a result, the digital
                        humanities have become the driving force behind
                        building a laboratory space. This new vision of the
                        humanities propelled the creation of laboratories
                        with missions related strongly to the idea of
                        reconstructing the humanities in the vein of
                        technological innovations. Good examples are the
                        following statements made by digital humanities
                        labs: “LINHD mission is to
                        redefine the way of working in digital humanities
                        by promoting innovation and technology in the
                        environment of the new information society”
                        [<a class="ref" href="#linhd">LINHD n.d.</a>] by the Digital Humanities
                        Innovation Lab (LINHD) established at the National
                        University of Distance Education in 2014, and “We at the Price Lab believe that if
                        the humanities are to survive and thrive, digital
                        research tools for the imagined future of our
                        various fields must be developed by scholars who
                        possess expertise in both humanistic inquiry and
                        digital technology”
                        [<a class="ref" href="#pricelab">Price Lab n.d.</a>] by Price Lab for Digital
                        Humanities launched at the University of
                        Pennsylvania in 2015.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p12">12</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p12">Therefore, along with the development of the digital
                        humanities, we can track the infrastructural changes
                        in the humanities of the twenty-first century as
                        moving from a center [<a class="ref" href="#zorich2008">Zorich 2008</a>]
                        [<a class="ref" href="#sample2010">Sample 2010</a>]
                        [<a class="ref" href="#fraistat2012">Fraistat 2012</a>] to a laboratory [<a class="ref" href="#emerson">Emerson et al. n.d.</a>]
                        [<a class="ref" href="#svensson2015">Svensson 2015</a>]
                        [<a class="ref" href="#svensson2016">Svensson 2016</a>]
                        [<a class="ref" href="#svensson2018">Svensson 2018</a>]
                        [<a class="ref" href="#earhart2015">Earhart 2015</a>]
                        [<a class="ref" href="#lane2017">Lane 2017</a>]
                        [<a class="ref" href="#pawlicka2017">Pawlicka 2017</a>]
                        [<a class="ref" href="#pawlicka-deger">Pawlicka-Deger n.d.</a>]
                        [<a class="ref" href="#smithies2017">Smithies et al. 2017</a>]
                        [<a class="ref" href="#smithies2020">Smithies et al. 2020</a>]
                        [<a class="ref" href="#foka2018">Foka et al. 2018</a>]
                        [<a class="ref" href="#pask2018">Pask 2018</a>]
                        [<a class="ref" href="#ricaurte2018">Ricaurte Quijano 2018</a>]. The years after 2010
                        are particularly significant period in the history
                        of the laboratory. First, we have experienced
                        tremendous growth in numbers of labs launched in the
                        academic and societal areas. Second, 2010 was
                        proclaimed to be the year of “the death of the centre”
                        [<a class="ref" href="#sample2010">Sample 2010</a>], which was now seen as
                        an unsustainable place in which to house collective
                        activities within the humanities. Third, in 2010,
                        the Franklin Humanities Institute (FHI) at Duke
                        University founded the Humanities Laboratories,
                        heralded as a “new architecture
                        of multiple humanities laboratories”
                        [<a class="ref" href="#fhi">FHI-DU Humanities Labs n.d.</a>]. This structure marked the
                        beginning of a new model for a laboratory in the
                        humanities as one that was created for a fixed
                        period and a specific purpose, but which was not
                        particularly related to physical situatedness and
                        not necessarily involved a digital component. This
                        model gave rise to <em class="term">conceptual
                           laboratories</em>, which were seen more as
                        projects and programs entailing different types of
                        learning and research practices in the humanities
                        rather than physical work spaces. The good examples
                        of conceptual labs are Humanities Labs at Colby
                        College, which were launched as innovative courses
                        in 2014 [<a class="ref" href="#cchl">Colby College Humanities Lab n.d.</a>]. The notion of the
                        laboratory is used in terms of new modes of research
                        and community outreach which do not necessarily
                        require a fixed physical location and equipment.
                        This significant change reflects the meaning of the
                        laboratory turn: the lab does not refer to a
                        physical place anymore; instead, it is related to a
                        way of thinking, communicating, and working. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p13">13</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p13">The last reason for the <em class="term">laboratory boom </em>
                        after 2010 is related to the growing interest in the
                        concept of community, public engagement, and
                        <em class="term">do-it-yourself</em> culture. It entails
                        popping out labs as makerspaces and hackathons in
                        the academic space (e.g., the Curtin Library
                        Makerspace at Curtin University) as well as
                        establishing labs in city space; for instance,
                        OpenLab was launched as a “challenge-driven innovation community” by
                        Karolinska Institute, KTH Royal Institute of
                        Technology, Stockholm University and Södertörn
                        University in 2013 and located in the City of
                        Stockholm [<a class="ref" href="#openlab">OpenLab n.d.</a>]. 
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">Laboratory Studies and Conceptual Changes in the
                        Social Sciences 
                     </h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p14">14</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p14">The second discourse on the laboratory turn brings us
                        back to the 1980s and 1990s when the conceptual
                        shifts in the social sciences occurred. The new
                        concepts had a significant impact on emerging new
                        theories and the research approach of the
                        twenty-first century. Based on Don Ihde’s
                        reflections, the following theoretical changes are
                        indicated: the emergence of the new sociology of
                        scientific knowledge, namely, social constructionism
                        and the actor-network theory of the 1970s; the new
                        philosophy of technology in the 1980s; and the
                        concept of science as a cultural practice in the
                        late 1980s and 1990s [<a class="ref" href="#ihde2009">Ihde 2009</a>, 7]. This concise timeline reveals the most
                        significant shifts in the notion of science, namely,
                        moving away from science as a knowledge towards
                        science as a practice [<a class="ref" href="#pickering1992">Pickering 1992</a>]. As Hannaway claims: “Science
                        no longer was simply a kind of knowledge (one
                        possessed scientia); it increasingly became a form
                        of activity (one did science). That there should
                        have arisen in this period a place specially set
                        aside for such activity and bearing a new name
                        serves to measure the force of that shift”
                        [<a class="ref" href="#hannaway1986">Hannaway 1986</a>, 586]. A new
                        approach to thinking about science was based on a
                        conviction that knowledge is produced as a part of
                        social and cultural practices; therefore, scientific
                        knowledge itself should be understood as a social
                        product. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p15">15</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p15">The perspective of science as a social practice opened up
                        new questions regarding a place in which to
                        construct science [<a class="ref" href="#latour1979">Latour et al. 1979</a>]
                        [<a class="ref" href="#galison1999">Galison et al. 1999</a>], a community of
                        practice [<a class="ref" href="#wenger1998">Wenger 1998</a>], and material
                        instruments and artefacts [<a class="ref" href="#latour1979">Latour et al. 1979</a>]
                        [<a class="ref" href="#lynch1985">Lynch 1985</a>]
                        [<a class="ref" href="#latour1987">Latour 1987</a>]. It was a move towards
                        unveiling scientific practices and investigating the
                        network of actors that take part in constructing
                        scientific knowledge, i.e., space, material
                        instruments, technology, and community. By the late
                        1980s, there was no doubt that major changes were
                        coming, driven by research in science and technology
                        studies: <cite class="title italic">Laboratory
                           Life</cite> by Bruno Latour and Steve Woolgar
                        (1979), <cite class="title italic">The Manufacture of
                           Knowledge</cite> by Karin Knorr Cetina (1981),
                        <cite class="title italic">Art and Artifact in
                           Laboratory Science</cite> by Michael Lynch
                        (1985), and <cite class="title italic">Science in
                           Action</cite> by Latour (1987).
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p16">16</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p16">Such a perspective on science entailed establishing new
                        fields to explore the various aspects of the social
                        construction of science. One area refers to a
                        contextual theory of knowledge, assuming that the
                        knowledge is situated in practice, in contrast to
                        conceptual knowledge, which is abstracted from
                        situations [<a class="ref" href="#brown1989">Brown et al. 1989</a>, 32]. This
                        means, to put it slightly differently, that situated
                        knowledge is a part of the activity, context, and
                        culture in which it is constructed and used. Viewed
                        in this way, space for knowledge production began to
                        be one of the key research issues. Place defines the
                        condition of scientific knowledge construction and
                        determines the research mode and perspectives. Under
                        these circumstances, laboratory studies arrived
                        eventually as a new field focused on the
                        investigation of the space used for scientific
                        inquiry [<a class="ref" href="#knorrcetina1995">Knorr Cetina 1995</a>].
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p17">17</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p17">In this light, the emergence of the laboratory in the
                        humanities entails a significant shift from the
                        <em class="emph">text</em> towards the <em class="emph">place</em>
                        where it is constructed. The laboratory draws
                        attention to the space in which humanities
                        experiments are conducted, the knowledge is
                        produced, and scholarly communication occurs.
                        Consequently, the humanities are seen as a
                        <em class="emph">practice</em> and <em class="emph">process</em>
                        that engages space, interactions, and equipment.
                        Like the natural sciences and techno-science, the
                        humanities involve “infrastructural thinking”
                        [<a class="ref" href="#svensson2015">Svensson 2015</a>, 337], according
                        to which the architecture of the humanistic inquiry
                        determines the process of knowledge construction. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p18">18</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p18">The 1980s and 1990s, as Robert E. Kohler observed
                        astutely, were thus recognized as a productive time
                        for laboratory studies, and the laboratory itself
                        was seen as a social institution. After that time,
                        the notion of the laboratory was neglected until
                        interest was revived again in the twenty-first
                        century [<a class="ref" href="#kohler2008">Kohler 2008</a>, 761].
                        Kohler’s article “Lab
                        History” from 2008 is a significant
                        gesture, implying that there was a surge in lab
                        activity again after 2007 and a need for tracking
                        its history. In this context, it is worth recalling
                        another important publication, namely, <cite class="title italic">Representation in Scientific
                           Practice. Revisited</cite>
                        [<a class="ref" href="#coopmans2014">Coopmans et al. 2014</a>], a revised book
                        originally published in 1990. The manuscript
                        suggests that research topics come back again after
                        twenty-four years. One key issue it addresses is a
                        return to the idea of laboratory, which, as the
                        editors note, “extends to other
                        spaces and places via collaborative ventures,
                        shared data centers, and information and
                        communication technologies”, challenging
                        “the very distinction between
                        laboratory and field”
                        [<a class="ref" href="#coopmans2014">Coopmans et al. 2014</a>, 1]. Both
                        publications draw a connection between the study of
                        scientific laboratories in the 1980s and
                        laboratories of the twenty-first century, which have
                        popped out in the humanities, social sciences, and
                        outside of the university. 
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">Cultural Categories: Innovation, the Maker Movement,
                        and Community
                     </h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p19">19</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p19">The last line of development of the laboratory turn runs
                        through the prevailing cultural categories of the
                        twenty-first century. Let us now take a look at the
                        following three cultural discourses and their
                        impacts on changes within the university and
                        humanities. The first category of innovation has
                        dominated cultural and social rhetoric and given
                        rise to new concepts, such as the innovation society
                        and innovation paradigm. According to this rhetoric,
                        to tackle the complex social, cultural, and economic
                        problems of the twenty-first century, society must
                        turn into an innovation society, which drives
                        breakthrough solutions and cutting-edge
                        technologies. Such discourse has led to the design
                        of the manifold varieties of innovations labs that
                        have popped up like mushrooms within the university
                        and city space as social institutions; for instance,
                        the Scholarly Innovation Lab (SIL) at the UCLA
                        library and the Digital Innovation Lab at the
                        University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. The
                        innovation concept has begun to be a crucial
                        category defining the humanities labs and signifying
                        the new features found within these labs, including
                        a strong link between the humanities and the
                        creative industries, providing cutting-edge
                        equipment for excellent research, and solving hard
                        problems. As a result of this discourse, the concept
                        of an innovative university emerged with the desire
                        to turn the university into a successful and
                        competitive business or entrepreneurial university
                        [<a class="ref" href="#thorp2010">Thorp et al. 2010</a>]. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p20">20</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p20">The innovation approach requires effective creative ideas
                        and thinking outside the box. Creativity is seen as
                        a key method with which to improve social and
                        economic conditions and “devise
                        potentially better options for the future”
                        [<a class="ref" href="#moran2010">Moran 2010</a>, 76]. A societal
                        awareness of the value of creativity is constructed
                        by establishing <span class="hi italic">creative
                           spaces</span> that integrate the local community
                        around the processes of creative endeavours. One
                        such place is a library creative space that “focuses wholly or in part on content
                        creation as opposed to content consumption
                        alone”
                        [<a class="ref" href="#johnson2016">Johnson 2016</a>, 4]. The process of
                        creation can include drawings and photographs, audio
                        materials, videos, three-dimensional objects,
                        computer coding, web-based multimedia, and more.
                        Hence, library creative spaces play a key role in
                        expanding the function of the library from providing
                        information resources and services to integrating
                        and developing the community through creative
                        activities. One realization of these creative spaces
                        is the advent of a laboratory in the common space
                        that is the library. A laboratory in the library
                        offers space, equipment, and resources and guides
                        learning how to use digital tools and create digital
                        projects [<a class="ref" href="#goodman2014">Goodman 2014</a>]
                        [<a class="ref" href="#hamilton2015">Hamilton et al. 2015</a>]
                        [<a class="ref" href="#johnson2016">Johnson 2016</a>]
                        [<a class="ref" href="#kavanaghwebb2018">Kavanagh Webb 2018</a>].
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p21">21</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p21">Another type of creative space is the makerspace defined
                        as a “center or workspace where
                        like-minded people get together to make
                        things”
                        [<a class="ref" href="#hatch2013">Hatch 2013</a>, 13]. The concept of
                        makerspace is particularly related to a creative and
                        participatory culture. It was conceived of as an
                        outgrowth of the cultural <em class="term">maker
                           movement</em>, created as a “return to craft”, in which people can
                        build things together again [<a class="ref" href="#proske2013">Proske 2013</a>]. Therefore, coming back to
                        the idea of <em class="emph">making things</em> came about as
                        a response to consumption and corporate culture,
                        driving interest in hacker and
                        <em class="term">do-it-yourself</em> cultures. Labcraft,
                        using Hendrik Tiesinga and Remko Berkhout’s term
                        [<a class="ref" href="#tiesinga2014">Tiesinga et al. 2014</a>], is thus seen as an
                        innovative and, above all, community lab, seeking to
                        connect people, create a space for dialogue, and
                        transfer ideas to the world. Such labs aim to create
                        new solutions and develop new ways of seeing the
                        world. The maker movement has been embodied by the
                        rise of media labs, established as institutionalized
                        units (the academic media labs), cultural events
                        (media lab workshops), and alternative models of
                        education based on tinkering and hacking.
                        Eventually, the <em class="term">do-it-yourself</em> approach
                        made inroads into academic culture through the
                        launch of makerspaces (e.g., Maker Lab in the
                        Humanities at the University of Victoria) and
                        hackerspaces (e.g., Blow Things Up at the University
                        of Colorado, Boulder) and organizing hackathons
                        (e.g., in the Computational Humanities Lab at the
                        University of Wisconsin–Madison). 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p22">22</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p22">The last cultural category, which has accompanied the
                        maker movement, is community. The labcraft,
                        makerspace, and hackathon movements are all based on
                        the idea of the community being the main resource
                        and driving force behind them. The idea of the
                        community, introduced in the 1990s [<a class="ref" href="#wenger1998">Wenger 1998</a>], gained importance again in
                        the twenty-first century, along with the concepts of
                        civic engagement, activism, and the public
                        humanities. Community and public engagement began to
                        be common categories used to describe media and
                        humanities labs. For instance, the Scholars’ Lab at
                        the University of Virginia Library is described as a
                        community lab with the following motto: “We build up people and practices
                        more than products.” The lab prioritizes
                        the process of learning and working together: “‘People over projects’ means
                        that we care more about such outcomes, than about
                        whether a formal ‘project’ happens”
                        [<a class="ref" href="#scholarslab">Scholars' Lab n.d.</a>]. The Change Making
                        Media Lab at the University of Southern California,
                        in turn, is a good example of public engagement in
                        that it collaborates with people outside of the
                        academy and creates products, such as entertaining
                        dramas, that have real impacts on the local
                        community. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p23">23</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p23">Cultural trends and a circulation of particular concepts
                        are reflected in the emergence of different types of
                        academic institutions, ranging from the
                        entrepreneurial to the engaged university. To meet
                        contemporary challenges, the humanities have made an
                        “infrastructural turn”
                        [<a class="ref" href="#rockwell2010">Rockwell 2010</a>] to build a physical
                        place that, through the architecture itself, brings
                        new features to the field: innovation,
                        experimentation, hands-on practices, and
                        collaboration. Under such circumstances, humanities
                        labs have been constructed. 
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">A Brief History of the Laboratory in the Humanities</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p24">24</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p24">The first laboratories serving other than natural sciences were
                     computer science labs established in media studies in the
                     1980s and 1990s; for instance, the Laboratory Paragraphe at
                     the University of Paris 8 in 1983, Media Lab at MIT in 1985,
                     and Aalto Media Lab at Aalto University in 1993. Media labs
                     were launched as production, dynamic, and experimental
                     research spaces, studios, and ateliers. The goals of the
                     first laboratories were to foster the creation of new media
                     projects which explored the impact of technology on society
                     and the human condition, developed hardware and software
                     within the context of artistic projects, and tested the
                     potential of electronic technologies. Concurrently, in the
                     late 1990s, the word “lab” was applied to humanities
                     and technology, for example, HUMlab at Umeå University was
                     founded in 1997 and Stanford Humanities Lab at Stanford
                     University in 1999. Although the institutional models for
                     these units were not new, their conceptualization as
                     “lab” was an original move. Nevertheless, the
                     end of the twentieth century and beginning of the
                     twenty-first century remained under the domination of media
                     labs. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p25">25</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p25">Since 2007, the situation changed significantly through the
                     dissemination of the concept of a laboratory in the
                     humanities domain. The laboratory concept has expanded
                     rapidly across the humanities department (e.g., the Global
                     History Lab in the Department of History at Princeton
                     University, 2007; the Media Archaeology Lab in the
                     Department of English at the University of Colorado,
                     Boulder, 2009) and libraries (e.g., the Scholars’ Lab
                     launched in the Alderman Library of the University of
                     Virginia, 2008). The trend towards building laboratories
                     continued unabated, reaching the point of the
                     <em class="term">laboratory boom</em> after 2010 that
                     converged with the computational turn in the humanities [<a class="ref" href="#berry2011">Berry 2011</a>], the development of the
                     digital humanities [<a class="ref" href="#gold2012">Gold 2012</a>], and the
                     emergence of virtual laboratory (Alfalab, a project of the
                     Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences, run in
                     2009-2011). Since 2010, the concept of laboratory has spread
                     over the university campus, made inroads into city space and
                     public cultural institutions [<a class="ref" href="#mahey2019">Mahey et al. 2019</a>] and
                     been launched in places that had never been designated for
                     this purpose.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p26">26</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p26">Along with the humanities labs, with names referring mainly to
                     disciplines and cultural categories (e.g., the Culture Lab
                     at Brown University and Participatory Cultures Lab at McGill
                     University), digital humanities labs have begun to
                     proliferate right next to existing models of centers (e.g.,
                     the Digital Humanities Laboratory at Ecole Polytechnique
                     Fédérale de Lausanne, Digital Humanities Lab at Utrecht
                     University, and the Franke Family Digital Humanities
                     Laboratory at Yale University). The proliferation of various
                     labs in the humanities has led to the broadening of the
                     concept of laboratory beyond the notion of a physical place.
                     The term “laboratory” is used to describe the following
                     places, initiatives, and ideas: an interdisciplinary
                     department (the Humanities Lab at Lund University), a center
                     (the HUMlab at Umeå University), a makerspace (the Maker Lab
                     in the Humanities at the University of Victoria), an
                     incubator for new ideas (the Humanities Lab at American
                     University), a research workshop (the Northwestern
                     University Digital Humanities Laboratory at Northwestern
                     University), a collaboration of individuals (the Nebraska
                     Literary Lab at the University of Nebraska), a coalition
                     (the Humanities Action Lab led from Rutgers
                     University-Newark), a student-led initiative (the Public
                     Humanities Lab at the University of Virginia), a
                     state-of-the-art facility (the Digital Humanities Lab at the
                     University of Exeter), an innovative course (the Humanities
                     Labs at Colby College), a study programme (the Humanities
                     Lab at Leiden University), consortium (the DigHumLab at
                     Aarhus University), a virtual research environment (the
                     Digital Humanities Innovation Lab at the National University
                     of Distance Education), and even a podcast (the Literature
                     Lab Podcasts at Brandeis University). Consequently, the
                     notion of laboratory has gone far beyond its traditional
                     meaning, turning into a <em class="term">project</em> that can be
                     done or an <em class="term">action</em> that can be taken, then
                     dispersed all over the world. A good example of this
                     approach is the Humanities Action Lab led from Rutgers
                     University-Newark. It is a coalition of universities,
                     organizations, and public spaces in twenty cities that
                     collaborate to build community-curated public humanities
                     projects. The lab can be created everywhere needed to engage
                     a community around a particular challenge. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p27">27</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p27">Thus, over the last years, we have observed the proliferation of
                     humanities labs and the growing interest in a laboratory
                     that implies a new mode of working. It suffices to mention
                     conferences, panel discussions, and seminars devoted to the
                     concept and organization of laboratory: “Building the Humanities Lab: Scholarly Practices in
                     Virtual Research Environments”, the panel
                     session in the Digital Humanities conference at King’s
                     College London in 2010; “Theories and
                     Practices of the Literary Lab” roundtable at
                     Modern Language Association National Meeting in Boston in
                     2013; “The Hum Lab: A Consortial
                     Workshop” at Haverford College in 2014;
                     “The Humanities Laboratory:
                     Discussions of New Campus Models”, organized
                     by Arizona State University’s Institute for Humanities
                     Research for the National Endowment for the Humanities in
                     2016; “Reimagining the Humanities
                     Lab”, a panel discussion at ADHO Digital
                     Humanities Conference in Mexico City in 2018; “What Is a Feminist Lab?”
                     symposium at the University of Colorado, Boulder in 2019;
                     “Humanities Laboratories:
                     Critical Infrastructures and Knowledge
                     Experiments” workshop at King’s College
                     London in 2019; “Rebuilding
                     Laboratories” workshop at the University of
                     Birmingham in 2019; and “The
                     Architecture of Science and the Humanities”
                     workshop at Netherlands Institute for Advanced Study in
                     2019. This list shows that there is an urgent need to
                     discuss this institutional model for the humanities and
                     understand its implications for scholarly research and
                     teaching practices. 
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Typology of Humanities Labs</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p28">28</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p28">To comprehend a laboratory in the humanities and identify its
                     different realization, I firstly collected the descriptions
                     of labs ranging from media labs to digital and non-digital
                     humanities labs [<a class="ref" href="#pawlicka-deger2019">Pawlicka-Deger 2019</a>],
                     scrutinize the context and meaning of the term
                     “laboratory”, analyse their mission statements,
                     and further determine their functions. Before discussing the
                     typology in detail, however, we can pose a significant
                     question of what is a humanities lab in itself? To answer
                     this question, let us look at below statements from three
                     laboratories: 
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>At Humanities +
                           Design our mission is to produce, through the lens
                           of humanistic inquiry, new modes of thinking in
                           design and computer science to serve data-driven
                           research in the humanities. We believe that
                           humanistic inquiry, grounded in interpretation,
                           has much to contribute to the development of
                           technologies if they are to help us reveal
                           ambiguity and paradox, allowing human-scale
                           exploration of complex systems. In the laboratory
                           environment, theoretical and methodological
                           discussions happen side-by-side with hands-on work
                           with digital materials. Humanities scholars and
                           students, designers, engineers, and computer
                           scientists engage together in ongoing tool design
                           as defined by the specific needs of participating
                           humanities projects.
                            [<a class="ref" href="#hd">Humanities + Design n.d.</a>]
                        </p>
                     </blockquote>
                     
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>The Digital Humanities Laboratory
                           (DHLab), a unit of Yale University Library, offers
                           space, community, and resources for Yale scholars
                           who are using computational methods to pursue
                           research questions in the arts, humanities, and
                           humanistic social sciences. Located inside
                           Sterling Memorial Library, the Franke Family
                           Digital Humanities Laboratory is a hub for
                           consultations, training, and opportunities that
                           support Yale students, faculty, and cultural
                           heritage professionals in their engagement with
                           digital tools and techniques.
                            [<a class="ref" href="#dhlab">Yale DH Lab n.d.</a>]
                        </p>
                     </blockquote>
                     
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>The Humanities Lab at ASU is
                           designed as an experimental space in which
                           interdisciplinary faculty teams work with students
                           from a variety of academic and cultural
                           backgrounds to investigate grand social
                           challenges, to construct researchable questions
                           that delve deeply into those challenges, and to
                           generate possible approaches to complex, “wicked”
                           issues like immigration, health, and climate
                           change, for which there are no easy
                           answers.
                            [<a class="ref" href="#azhl">ASU Humanities Lab n.d.</a>]
                        </p>
                     </blockquote>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p29">29</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p29">The first lab, the Humanities + Design is a research lab at the
                     Center for Spatial and Textual Analysis at Stanford
                     University focused on designing and producing tools through
                     the lens of humanistic inquiry. Critical thinking practiced
                     by humanities scholars is thus applied to a hands-on work
                     conducted by designers, engineers, and computer scientists.
                     The lab team works on building open source tools for digital
                     research, such as Data Pen, an instrument for creating data
                     sets that draws from linked data sources, and a
                     visualization tool Palladio. The second example represents a
                     lab established as a shared space at the university’s
                     library. It is a facility that provides equipment and
                     digital technologies and support in digital humanities
                     skills acquisition for both research and teaching purposes
                     through consultations, training, and guest lectures. This
                     multifunctional lab has been built to offer space,
                     community, and resources for scholars in the arts,
                     humanities, and social sciences. The last statement, in
                     turn, describes the Humanities Lab at Arizona State
                     University which is a set of lab-based courses. The lab
                     offers an experimental space where students and faculty work
                     on a particular problem in intergenerational collaborative
                     teams for one or two semesters. Each lab is devoted to a
                     specific socio-cultural challenge that is investigated
                     through critical thinking, critical engagement, hands-on
                     practices, and interdisciplinary discussions. Although these
                     three labs represent different functions and practices, each
                     is guided by a “laboratory” ethos, defined by the
                     Stanford Humanities Lab: collaborative, co-creative, and
                     team-based [<a class="ref" href="#hartwig2011">Hartwig 2011</a>]. These features are
                     the core of laboratory where the humanistic inquiry,
                     knowledge, and practices are applied, produced, tested, and
                     investigated. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p30">30</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p30">This wide range of uses of the term “laboratory” implies
                     that labs are varied due to the function and activities.
                     Based on the collected data, I indicate the following six
                     functions of laboratories in the humanities:
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="ptext">
                     <ol class="list">
                        <li class="item">Research-focused lab - a place for conducting,
                           coordinating, and promoting cross-disciplinary
                           research, ranging from theoretical, critical, and
                           methodological analysis and interpretations to
                           practices based on learning-by-doing approach, such
                           the application of digital tools, experimentation,
                           and prototyping.
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">Design-focused lab - a place for designing and
                           producing technical tools, applications, website,
                           platforms, and creative works which provide new
                           methods, tools, and a subject of critical
                           research.
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">Work station-type lab - a place for providing
                           equipment, hardware, software, and resource for
                           facilitating research, teaching, and learning. 
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">Service-focused lab - a place for meeting the
                           individual needs of users through consulting,
                           technological services (web hosting, maintenance,
                           dissemination and preservation for digital
                           projects), and computer services (support for
                           conducting digital projects).
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">Public engagement-focused lab - a place that conducts
                           research and organizes events related to social
                           challenges and community affairs, creates
                           community-curated and participatory projects,
                           develops new ways of collaborations with public
                           audiences, and promotes civic engagement. 
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">Pedagogical-focused lab - a place for teaching,
                           training, and learning through courses, seminars,
                           lectures, workshops, etc. A laboratory that implies
                           collaborative and experimental practices, entails
                           the dissemination of new forms of teaching and
                           learning in the humanities, including hands-on
                           practices based on the learning-by-doing approach
                           (popularized by creative spaces, makerspaces, and
                           hackerspaces that practice prototyping, tinkering,
                           and hacking; e.g. the Maker Lab in the Humanities at
                           the University of Victoria and the Computational
                           Humanities Lab at the University of
                           Wisconsin–Madison); experiential learning and
                           offsite research, that is to say, learning through
                           direct experience outside a traditional academic
                           setting, for instance, through traveling (The Global
                           Humanities Lab course in the Alice Kaplan Institute
                           for the Humanities at Northwestern University offers
                           students the investigation of an international
                           humanities through traveling to cities being the
                           subject of the study) or field trips (e.g. the
                           Encountering Food course of the Humanities and Arts
                           Labs at Albion College where students explore local
                           and global food through a series of projects and
                           field trips and organize a community dinner);
                           problem-based learning meaning that students
                           investigate an open-ended problem through
                           collaborative and interdisciplinary practices (e.g.
                           the Humanities Lab at Arizona State University); and
                           community-curated public humanities projects (e.g.
                           practiced by the Humanities Action Lab, a coalition
                           of universities, organizations, and public spaces in
                           forty cities, led from Rutgers University-Newark).
                           
                        </li>
                     </ol>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p31">31</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p31">Since any laboratory is a self-defined entity focused on a
                     specific function, activity, and practice, it can be
                     difficult to build a common definition of the laboratory in
                     the humanities. However, based on the above reflections, I
                     attempt to create the following working definition of the
                     humanities lab: 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p32">32</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p32">
                     <span class="hi italic">A laboratory in the humanities is a
                        technical, research, and intellectual infrastructure
                        for humanistic issues and inquiries which offers
                        space (physical, virtual or conceptual), community,
                        and resources to conduct a set of activities
                        resulting from its specific function (e.g. research,
                        design, work station, service, pedagogical, and
                        public engagement). Laboratory initiatives are
                        guided by the following principles:
                        interdisciplinarity, collaboration, co-creation,
                        team-based, and experimentation.</span>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p33">33</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p33">The widespread application of the term “laboratory” has led
                     to the fact that there is no single model for the humanities
                     laboratory. Based on more than two hundred laboratories,
                     established in North America, North-Western Europe, and
                     Australia, I determine five models for the humanities labs
                     due to their situatedness (physical or virtual), traditions,
                     functions, scholarly questions, practices, and activities.
                     Let us now explore these five models (the center-type lab,
                     the techno-science lab, the work station-type lab, the
                     social challenges-centric lab, and virtual lab), investigate
                     their organization and indicate a discourse from which they
                     originate. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">The center-type labs </h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p34">34</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p34">To characterize the center model-based laboratories, it
                        is essential to summarize the infrastructure changes
                        that occurred in the humanities over the past years.
                        In the 1990s, as previously stated, the first
                        laboratories emerged in the humanities (e.g. the
                        English Media Lab at the Department of English of
                        the University of Manitoba in 1995 and the HUMlab at
                        Umeå University in 1997) modelled upon media labs
                        for providing digital and analog media, facilitating
                        the use of digital and online resources, and
                        assisting with the application of digital tools for
                        the study of literature, language, culture, and
                        history. Since the 1990s, the digital humanities
                        have been rapidly developing through establishing
                        the first humanities computing centers, later
                        becoming the digital humanities centers, defined by
                        Zorich as “an entity where new
                        media and technologies are used for
                        humanities-based research, teaching, and
                        intellectual engagement and
                        experimentation”
                        [<a class="ref" href="#zorich2008">Zorich 2008</a>, 4]. The center
                        played a crucial role in facilitating and
                        reinforcing digital humanities research at the
                        university by providing digital resources, services,
                        and tools, supporting the teaching of new digital
                        practices, and hosting symposia and lectures (e.g.,
                        the Centre for Computing in the Humanities at King’s
                        College London established in 1991 and Maryland
                        Institute for Technology in the Humanities in 1999).
                        Along with the proliferation of the digital
                        humanities centers, a new institutional unit emerged
                        in the humanities — a laboratory — modelled on a
                        center for advancing and fostering the humanities
                        research on and with digital technologies (e.g., the
                        Electronic Textual Cultures Lab at the University of
                        Victoria founded in 2005 and Scholars’ Lab at the
                        University of Virginia in 2006). 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p35">35</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p35">The next changes involve the reorganization of digital
                        humanities centers into departments (e.g., the
                        Centre for Computing in the Humanities was renamed
                        the King’s College Department of Digital Humanities)
                        and thereby, the institutionalization of the
                        discipline and the establishment of digital
                        humanities programmes and degrees. Later, the
                        infrastructure of the center would be a strategic
                        choice for the university to further set up the
                        department of digital humanities (e.g. the
                        Department of Digital Humanities at the University
                        of Helsinki grew out of the Helsinki Centre for
                        Digital Humanities, research network, and
                        infrastructure established in 2016). Meantime,
                        laboratories have been launched in the humanities
                        departments and libraries, emulating the center
                        model or establishing an entirely new infrastructure
                        for the humanities research, teaching, and
                        activities. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p36">36</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p36">Laboratories built upon the center model are a central
                        institution at the university for conducting,
                        coordinating, and promoting research, teaching, and
                        infrastructure for digitization in the humanities
                        and social science. They play a key role in building
                        collaboration across departments and providing
                        support and training to the entire university, as
                        exemplified by the Price Lab for Digital Humanities
                        at the University of Pennsylvania: “The Price Lab serves as a central
                        node of communication and exchange across Penn’s
                        many departments, centers, and schools with
                        expertise and interest in the digital
                        humanities”
                        [<a class="ref" href="#pricelab">Price Lab n.d.</a>]. Instances of laboratories
                        that were influenced by the center model in other
                        institutions include: the HUMlab at Umeå University
                        (1997); the Humanities Lab at Lund University
                        (2005); Electronic Textual Cultures Lab at the
                        University of Victoria (2005); the Scholars’ Lab at
                        the University of Virginia (2006); the Digital
                        Humanities Lab at the University of Basel (2010);
                        the Carolina Digital Humanities: Digital Innovation
                        Lab at the University of North Carolina at Chapel
                        Hill (2011); the UC Arts Digital Lab at the
                        University of Canterbury (2011); the D-Lab at the
                        University of California, Berkeley (2013); the NULab
                        for Texts, Maps, and Networks at Northeastern
                        University (2013); the Digital Humanities Lab at
                        Utrecht University (2014); the Digital Humanities
                        Innovation Lab (LINHD) at the National University of
                        Distance Education (2014); the Franke Family Digital
                        Humanities Laboratory at Yale University (2015); and
                        the Price Lab for Digital Humanities at the
                        University of Pennsylvania (2015), 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p37">37</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p37">The center-type lab model is identified by the following
                        features:
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="ptext">
                        <ul class="list">
                           <li class="item">Physical situatedness – the lab is mainly
                              located in humanities departments or in
                              libraries;
                           </li>
                           <li class="item">Manifold functions – the lab carries out
                              various functions from conducting and coordinating
                              cross-disciplinary research to providing space,
                              equipment, and resources to facilitating research,
                              teaching, and learning;
                           </li>
                           <li class="item">Facilities and equipment – the lab offers
                              space, resources, and equipment for conducting and
                              facilitating research projects; 
                           </li>
                           <li class="item">A wide range of research projects – the lab
                              involves research groups and projects devoted to
                              the broad scope of humanities study;
                           </li>
                           <li class="item">Academic appointments and staffing – the lab
                              affiliates faculty and researchers as well as its
                              own staff;
                           </li>
                           <li class="item">The community – the goal of the lab is to
                              bring together faculty, staff, and students as
                              well as independent scholars and participants from
                              cultural institutions and industry interested in a
                              particular discipline, practices, and methods
                              through series of open lectures, workshops, and
                              seminars; 
                           </li>
                           <li class="item">Education – the lab offers teaching and
                              training in the form of workshops, courses,
                              academic degree programs, postgraduate and faculty
                              training, fellowships, internships, and summer
                              schools;
                           </li>
                           <li class="item">Service – the lab offers a number of services
                              to support faculties, staff, and students:
                              consulting, providing technology solutions,
                              maintaining and preserving digital projects,
                              etc.
                           </li>
                        </ul>
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p38">38</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p38">While any one of these features might be present in other
                        models, the center is clearly distinguished by a
                        large-scale central role in advancing humanities
                        scholarship as well as supporting the study and the
                        uses of digital methods and technologies for
                        research and teaching in the humanities. 
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">The techno-science labs </h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p39">39</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p39">In the natural sciences a laboratory is an ordinary place
                        which provides facilities, instruments, and
                        equipment with which to conduct experiments, test
                        hypotheses, and investigate samples. Science
                        laboratories have a long history dating back to the
                        alchemical laboratory in the sixteenth century;
                        however, for the purposes of this paper, we will
                        focus on the techno-science model developed in the
                        second half of the twentieth century, along with the
                        acceleration of technological innovation. A crucial
                        moment in a lab history occurred when the laboratory
                        was exposed as a space for constructing knowledge
                        through the use of technology and instruments rather
                        than a place for revealing reality. Sociology of
                        scientific knowledge, mentioned in the previous
                        section, played a key role in this movement.
                        Techno-science implies that science cannot be
                        detached from the technological tools that shape our
                        perceptions and help to produce the knowledge; thus,
                        our observations are always embodied via the
                        practical use of instruments. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p40">40</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p40">Techno-science labs associated with the categories of
                        production, technology, innovation, and
                        experimentation became an inspirational architecture
                        for the humanities in need of a new place to explore
                        the emerging innovative uses of technology in the
                        study of history, art, and culture. Therefore, the
                        impulse to establish a laboratory in the humanities
                        came about in order to replicate the knowledge
                        production environment associated with science. A
                        science-based lab is thus seen as a driving force
                        for cutting-edge projects and a natural space for
                        developing and applying technologies to humanities
                        research. The following labs are good
                        representations of the techno-science lab model in
                        the humanities: the Stanford Humanities Lab at
                        Stanford University (1999-2009); the Critical Media
                        Lab at the University of Waterloo (2008); the
                        CulturePlex Lab at the University of Western Ontario
                        (2010); the Digital Humanities and Literary
                        Cognition Lab at Michigan State University (2012);
                        the Humanities + Design a Research Lab at Stanford
                        University (2012); the Maker Lab in the Humanities
                        at the University of Victoria (2012); the Poetic
                        Media Lab at Stanford University (2013); the King’s
                        Digital Lab at King’s College London (2015). 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p41">41</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p41">Based on these examples, laboratories built using the
                        techno-science model are driven by the following
                        functions: providing state-of-the-art facilities and
                        equipment for experimental and innovative research;
                        promoting new ways of conducting research, teaching,
                        and learning through the application of digital
                        technologies; introducing new digital methods and
                        new modes of knowledge (e.g., data mining, mapping,
                        data visualization, simulation, 3D digitisation,
                        tinkering, coding, prototyping, and fabricating);
                        producing data-driven research in the humanities;
                        designing applications, tools, and platforms used in
                        digital humanities research and teaching; and
                        designing technical infrastructure for the
                        humanities. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p42">42</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p42">The principles that guide the techno-science-based
                        laboratory are identified as:
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="ptext">
                        <ul class="list">
                           <li class="item">Physical situatedness – the lab is located in
                              a particular place, in different departments (e.g.
                              the Critical Media Lab is housed in the Institute
                              of Experimental Design and Media Cultures, while
                              the Digital Humanities and Literary Cognition Lab
                              at the Department of English), and shared by
                              people coming from various disciplines who work
                              together on research projects;
                           </li>
                           <li class="item">Equipment and technology – the lab is equipped
                              with technological devices and tools that are
                              necessary for conducting experiments and
                              innovative projects; for example, hardware,
                              software, applications, platforms, 3D digital
                              technologies, eye-tracking systems, and so
                              forth;
                           </li>
                           <li class="item">Interdisciplinarity – strong post-disciplinary
                              modes of research carrying out by humanities
                              scholars, designers, computer scientists, software
                              analysts, and engineers;
                           </li>
                           <li class="item">Experimental research – conducting a
                              technology-based project that attempts to explore
                              new methods of creativity, fill research gaps, and
                              open new scholarly perspectives; 
                           </li>
                           <li class="item">Manual work – doing hands-on work with the use
                              of material devices, instruments, and
                              technologies; 
                           </li>
                           <li class="item">Collaboration – projects are done via
                              collaborative actions between faculty, staff, and
                              students, between different disciplines and
                              departments, and between the university, industry
                              and the public sphere; 
                           </li>
                           <li class="item">Applied research – designing applications,
                              tools, digital methods, and resources to meet the
                              specific needs of humanities projects (e.g., Breve
                              and Palladio, which are open-source tools for
                              research designed by Humanities + Design a
                              Research Lab);
                           </li>
                           <li class="item">Products – the lab work is focused on
                              designing measurable, applicable, and practical
                              products, for instance, the Lacuna tool, produced
                              by the Poetic Media Lab at Stanford University, is
                              used in the Rhizomatic Reading project developed
                              at the Center for Digital Humanities in the
                              Princeton University Library to analyse
                              connections across literary texts.
                           </li>
                        </ul>
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p43">43</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p43">The humanities labs originated from techno-science labs
                        are focused on production, tools, and research
                        products. Although they stress the notions of
                        community and collectivity, these concepts are not
                        their goals in and of themselves but rather a way to
                        achieve their objectives. Each lab represents
                        distinct aspects and missions, but their common and
                        the most significant feature is technology “being the glue”, to use
                        Pierre Proske’ description of the Media Lab
                        Melbourne [<a class="ref" href="#proske2013">Proske 2013</a>]. Digital
                        technology, tools, and platforms are at once the
                        methods, the research, and the objects of study
                        themselves. Drawing on the description of Stanford
                        Humanities Lab, we can summarize that these labs
                        involves a “triangulation of
                        arts practice, commentary/critique, and outreach,
                        merging research, pedagogy, publication and
                        practice. They didn’t just comment and discuss,
                        they built: new media, interactive archives,
                        predictive models of social change, new courses,
                        collaborative research workshops, art
                        exhibitions”
                        [<a class="ref" href="#hartwig2011">Hartwig 2011</a>].
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">The work station-type lab </h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p44">44</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p44">The next model is called both the work station and
                        service model [<a class="ref" href="#maron2014">Maron et al. 2014</a>], referring
                        to the idea of desktop classrooms, a computer lab,
                        and instructional technology spaces. This type of
                        laboratory operates as a physical room that
                        accumulates equipment and devices used to support
                        faculty and students in their work. It functions as
                        the work space that supplies facilities, such as
                        editing software, digital cameras, and audio
                        recording devices; provides services, such as
                        printing and studio spaces; and supports the use of
                        software and devices. Labs based on the work station
                        model are located mainly in libraries, which play a
                        key role in facilitating humanities research by
                        providing resources and equipment. The library is
                        also seen as a major place for digital humanities
                        since it typically carries out the following tasks:
                        digitizing materials, building digital collections
                        and resources, and supporting research data
                        management. Examples of the works station-type
                        laboratories include: the Digital Scholarship Lab at
                        Brown University (2012); the Digital Humanities Lab
                        at the University of Massachusetts Amherst (2012);
                        the Digital Humanities Lab at the University of
                        Wisconsin-Milwaukee (2013); the Digital Scholarship
                        Lab at the University of Oklahoma (2014); Willson
                        Center Digital Humanities Lab at the University of
                        Georgia (2015); the Digital Humanities Lab at
                        Bowling Green State University (2015); the Digital
                        Humanities Lab at Rutgers University (2015); the
                        Humanities Research Lab at California State
                        University, Northridge (2016); the Digital
                        Humanities Lab at the University of Exeter (2017);
                        the Digital Humanities Lab in the Centre for Digital
                        Humanities Research at Australian National
                        University (2017); and the Digital Scholarship Lab
                        at Michigan State University (2018).
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p45">45</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p45">These labs are guided by the following functions:
                        supplying facilities, equipment, and devices;
                        supporting faculty and students in their studies;
                        providing help in research data management; and
                        training faculty and students in regard to the
                        utilization of equipment, digital tools, and
                        software.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p46">46</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p46">The work station model is distinguished by features
                        listed below: 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="ptext">
                        <ul class="list">
                           <li class="item">Physical situatedness – the lab is located
                              mainly in libraries but also in the humanities
                              departments;
                           </li>
                           <li class="item">Reconfigurable space – the place is made to be
                              adjusted according to needs and conditions; for
                              example, the Digital Scholarship Lab at the Brown
                              University Library can be converted from a lecture
                              hall to a team project room;
                           </li>
                           <li class="item">Facilities, equipment, and technological tools
                              – the lab provides different types of facilities
                              (sound recording studio, interview room),
                              equipment (computers, cameras, eye trackers, 3D
                              printers), and software; 
                           </li>
                           <li class="item">Specific function – the lab defines its
                              purposes clearly, which may range from providing
                              equipment and tools for students, supporting
                              research data management, offering technical
                              assistance, such as metadata encoding and
                              archiving digital projects, and training faculty
                              and students on the use of various media and
                              tools;
                           </li>
                           <li class="item">Specific users – the lab targets specific
                              users who have access to the lab and permission to
                              use its facilities; for instance, the Digital
                              Humanities Lab at Rutgers University is available
                              only to members of the Rutgers digital humanities
                              community;
                           </li>
                           <li class="item">Terms and conditions – since the lab welcomes
                              everyone from any discipline and level of
                              experience, it provides rules related to the use
                              of the lab’s facilities and equipment. 
                           </li>
                        </ul>
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p47">47</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p47">The humanities lab as a work station aims to provide an
                        environment, services, and facilities which support
                        scholarly work rather than innovative research
                        projects, as in the case of techno-science labs. A
                        laboratory is thus understood literally as a place —
                        referring again to Hannaway’s definition — equipped
                        with specialized instruments and apparatuses that
                        require hands-on skills and knowledge for their
                        utilization. 
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">The social challenges-centric lab </h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p48">48</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p48">The next model of a humanities laboratory grows out of
                        social labs, community labs, and citizen labs [<a class="ref" href="#hassan2014">Hassan 2014</a>]
                        [<a class="ref" href="#kieboom2014">Kieboom 2014</a>]
                        [<a class="ref" href="#tiesinga2014">Tiesinga et al. 2014</a>]
                        [<a class="ref" href="#ricaurte2018">Ricaurte Quijano 2018</a>] as well as public
                        humanities initiatives. It comes from seeking “new research methods, new lines of
                        inquiry, and new ways of engaging with public
                        audiences”
                        [<a class="ref" href="#fhi">FHI-DU Humanities Labs n.d.</a>] for tackling real-world
                        problems and stimulating social changes. Marlieke
                        Kieboom claims that one way to address global and
                        local problems is to establish a new space entailing
                        new practices, methods, and solutions; a promising
                        place for undertaking the challenges is a laboratory
                        seen as a “container for social
                        experimentation”
                        [<a class="ref" href="#kieboom2014">Kieboom 2014</a>, 9]. A lab implies
                        new practices, such as collaboration, integration,
                        public action, and dialogue across departments,
                        institutions, and communities. A laboratory is an
                        experimental space where the humanities can merge
                        with other disciplines and take part in the process
                        of addressing local and global concerns. The great
                        example of this model is the Humanities Lab at
                        Arizona State University founded by Sally Kitch in
                        2017 to enhance problem-based study and
                        interdisciplinary and intergenerational
                        collaboration. As Kitch said, “I started the Humanities Lab because
                        I realized that our students were not benefitting
                        from the kind of interdisciplinary, exploratory
                        experiences faculty were getting through the IHR.
                        (…) So I wanted to see if we could establish a way
                        for students to get that experience; to recognize
                        the humanities as important for approaching and
                        addressing today’s challenges, because the kinds
                        of questions that really plague us are humanistic
                        at their core. They’re about values and culture
                        and understanding the way people form beliefs and
                        the kinds of attitudes we carry around with us and
                        the way we all live in our own narratives. And
                        encountering that is essential for solving these
                        problems.”
                         [<a class="ref" href="#greguska2019">Greguska 2019</a>] The Humanities
                        Lab was created as an experimental space for
                        investigating “wicked” problems, such as
                        immigration, health, and climate change through the
                        humanities inquiry approach and intervention: “Most of the really big challenges we
                        face are not fundamentally about technology,
                        science, economics, etc. They are human challenges
                        that have been with us for a very long time and
                        therefore require human-centred inquiry as part of
                        the search for a solution. Yet, often the
                        humanities disciplines are not included in such
                        discussions. Therefore, the Humanities Lab brings
                        the humanities to the table by emphasizing the
                        study of values and the way we understand the
                        world around us. Merging the humanities with
                        diverse disciplines helps us to see the grand
                        social challenges more holistically and therefore
                        puts us in a better position to conceptualize
                        solutions.”
                        [<a class="ref" href="#azhl">ASU Humanities Lab n.d.</a>]
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p49">49</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p49">Unlike the techno-science model, which is centred on
                        designing and applying technological tools to
                        research projects, the social challenges-centric
                        model aims to build a common and interventive space
                        that in itself is a way to address the most profound
                        social issues. I indicate three varieties of the
                        social challenges-centric model for a humanities
                        lab: coalition-based lab, problem-based lab, and
                        community engagement lab. This model is thus not a
                        unified structure, but a dynamic form driven by the
                        ideas of community, dialogue, and intervention. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p50">50</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p50">The first type of lab arises as an initiative of a
                        coalition of various institutions that activate a
                        laboratory as an urgent need to react to pressing
                        problems in a particular place. The Humanities
                        Action Lab (HAL) is a coalition of universities,
                        issue organizations, and public spaces in forty
                        cities led from Rutgers University-Newark. Students
                        and stakeholders in each city investigate a
                        particular problem in a local context, produce
                        community-curated public humanities projects, and
                        stimulate public dialogue on the urgent questions.
                        Laboratories can also work on the same problem
                        explored then by different communities and from
                        various perspectives. They develop local
                        contributions to national project that further
                        “travel nationally and
                        internationally to museums, public libraries,
                        cultural centers, and other spaces in each of the
                        communities that helped create them”
                        [<a class="ref" href="#hal">HAL n.d.</a>]. The examples of national
                        projects are “Guantánamo Public
                        Memory Project” hosted by Columbia
                        University. This initiative involved over 300
                        students from 13 universities to research, document,
                        and interpret the history of the US naval base at
                        Guantánamo Bay, Cuba. “Students
                        from around the country collaborated with more
                        than 600 community stakeholders including Haitian
                        refugees, former service people, and attorneys
                        representing current detainees, to explore GTMO’s
                        history from many perspectives, as well as the
                        questions it raises today. Together they created a
                        traveling exhibit, web platform, digital and
                        physical archive, interview collection, and series
                        of public dialogues. The exhibit has traveled for
                        more than 3 years to 18 cities and counting, with
                        public dialogues in each place. More than 500,000
                        people will have had a face-to-face encounter with
                        the exhibit, and many more online and through
                        social media”
                        [<a class="ref" href="#hal">HAL n.d.</a>]. This type of laboratory is a
                        great example of how the humanities can bring
                        together people from various institutions around a
                        particular challenge, participate in public dialogue
                        and call for action at the local and national
                        level.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p51">51</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p51">The problem-based lab is in turn set up around a central
                        theme for a specific purpose. It thus creates an
                        environment — problem space — around particular
                        urgent social and cultural issues that need to be
                        addressed by integrative and interdisciplinary
                        approach. Good examples are the labs within the
                        Humanities Laboratories at the Franklin Humanities
                        Institute of Duke University, where each individual
                        lab is devoted to a particular problem and launched
                        for mainly three years. The first lab at the FHI,
                        Haiti Lab, was established after Haiti’s natural
                        disaster in 2010 to broaden knowledge about Haitian
                        culture, history, and language and expand Haitian
                        studies in the U.S. Other labs at the FHI devoted to
                        significant social phenomena and challenges are
                        BorderWork(s) Lab (2011-2014) investigating the acts
                        of division and demarcation in the world; Health
                        Humanities Lab (2016- present) undertaking issues of
                        clinical medicine and public health from the
                        perspective of the humanities and social science;
                        and From Slavery to Freedom Lab (2018- present)
                        examining the life and afterlives of slavery and
                        emancipation. The similar type of problem-based lab
                        is also set up within the Humanities Lab at Arizona
                        State University where each lab works as a one- or
                        two-semester course bringing together students and
                        faculty around “wicked” issues. The lab is thus
                        established for a fixed period of time to
                        investigate grand social challenges, construct
                        researchable questions, and generate possible
                        approaches to complex problems. So far, the
                        Humanities Lab program has launched the following
                        courses: Health &amp; Wellbeing Lab, Sexual Violence
                        Lab, Sustaining Humans Lab, Rebuilding Puerto Rico
                        Lab, and Facing Immigration Lab. The next great
                        example, differing from the previous ones, is the
                        Human Security Collaboratory (HS Collab) launched by
                        the Global Security Initiative (GSI) at Arizona
                        State University focused on addressing complex
                        problems related to digital security and civil
                        rights through the application of digital humanities
                        tools and inquiries. The lab’s current projects
                        include “Border Quants”,
                        a collective of artists and scholars conducting
                        research related to digital human rights, personal
                        data protection, and decolonial approaches to data
                        use, and “Vibrant Lives”,
                        an immersive performance installation as a critical
                        comment on the use and monetization of personal data
                        production. The important part of the lab’s
                        activities is a public engagement through events,
                        such as a series of lunchtime conversations about
                        digital human security issues. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p52">52</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p52">The third type of lab — the community engagement lab —
                        aims to promote civic engagement through
                        participatory approaches to research and social
                        action. Good examples are the mentioned HS Collab at
                        Arizona State University and the Engage Media Lab at
                        The New School. The latter lab is a student group
                        and research lab that develops workshops,
                        screenings, and research projects in collaboration
                        with The New School students and the New York City
                        community. Other instances include the Public
                        Humanities Lab at the University of Virginia and the
                        Participatory Cultures Lab at McGill University. The
                        last one is particularly focused on participatory
                        research devoted to issues of social justice,
                        gender-based violence, food security, and poverty
                        alleviation. Research projects use various tools
                        that engage a community: digital storytelling,
                        photovoice, participatory archiving, and more.
                        Community engagement projects are conducted through
                        the collaboration with variety countries including
                        South Africa, Ethiopia, Mozambique, Vietnam, and
                        Indonesia. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p53">53</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p53">To summarize, instances of laboratories built upon the
                        social challenges-centric model include: the
                        Humanities Laboratories at Duke University (2010);
                        the Participatory Cultures Lab at McGill University
                        (2010); the Engage Media Lab at The New School
                        (2011); the Humanities Action Lab led from Rutgers
                        University-Newark (2014); the Human Security
                        Collaboratory (HS Collab) at Arizona State
                        University (2015); the Humanities Lab at Arizona
                        State University (2017); and the Public Humanities
                        Lab at the University of Virginia (2017). 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p54">54</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p54">Based on these cases, the social challenges-centric model
                        of labs can encompass the following functions:
                        building a community around the lab and challenges;
                        fostering collaboration and communication across
                        departments, institutions, and communities; engaging
                        with the local community beyond the university;
                        connecting the diverse local perspectives of
                        communities around the world; producing
                        community-curated public humanities projects;
                        propelling positive social, cultural, and
                        environmental changes; promoting civic engagement;
                        and initiating new public dialogues.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p55">55</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p55">The model is guided by the following principles:</div>
                     
                     <div class="ptext">
                        <ul class="list">
                           <li class="item">Flexible structure – the lab can be situated
                              physically or virtually and formed as a meeting
                              place, research group or course; in this sense, a
                              lab can be created anywhere at the university or
                              beyond;
                           </li>
                           <li class="item">Flexible duration – the lab can be set up for
                              a specific period of time and then can be closed
                              down once a project is concluded and goals are
                              achieved;
                           </li>
                           <li class="item">The community – people gathered around the lab
                              are the main resources and their dialogue are the
                              driving forces of the lab;
                           </li>
                           <li class="item">Collaboration and integration – the lab is an
                              integrative environment for faculty, staff,
                              students, and the local community;
                           </li>
                           <li class="item">Specific purpose of the lab – the goals are
                              particularly related to social challenges, global
                              “wicked” problems, and the local community;
                           </li>
                           <li class="item">The infrastructure of engagement – the lab
                              works as the infrastructure that provides space
                              and tools for intervening in social issues,
                              translating ideas into action, and enhancing the
                              engaged humanities;
                           </li>
                           <li class="item">A wide range of methods – the lab uses various
                              methods for tackling problems, such as public
                              dialogues, interventions, digital methods,
                              interviews, testimonies, prototyping, and
                              participatory-based methods;
                           </li>
                           <li class="item">Public actions – public initiatives are a
                              product of the lab, including exhibits, web
                              platforms, digital and physical archives,
                              interview collections, and series of public
                              dialogues.
                           </li>
                        </ul>
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p56">56</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p56">The social challenges-centric model for the humanities
                        lab originates from the concepts of social labs,
                        citizen labs, and public creative spaces. While the
                        techno-science model is centred on applied research,
                        technological issues, and innovative approaches, the
                        social challenges-centric model is created around
                        people, social issues, and public engagement.
                        Further, while the techno-science model produces
                        quantifiable and applied projects, the products of
                        this model of labs are dynamic, powerful, and
                        influential. As Zaid Hassan claims, “Complex challenges are therefore
                        dynamic and can change in unexpected ways over
                        time, whereas technical challenges are relatively
                        stable and static in comparison”
                        [<a class="ref" href="#hassan2014">Hassan 2014</a>]. To conclude, the social
                        challenges-centric model can be created in any
                        environment where there is a need to initiate
                        dialogue and collaboration across communities to
                        solve particular local problems.
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">The virtual lab </h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p57">57</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p57">Thus far, the term “laboratory” has been used in the
                        context of Hannaway’s definition of a place which
                        accumulates instruments, techniques, and
                        apparatuses. The techno-science, work station, and
                        community labs have one major thing in common, which
                        is physical situatedness [<a class="ref" href="#svensson2015">Svensson 2015</a>]. A concrete location with an infrastructure and
                        facilities determines the knowledge creation
                        practices, the collaboration methods, and social
                        interactions. However, in recent years, along with
                        the development of cyberinfrastructure, we have
                        witnessed the expansion of a new lab model: the
                        virtual laboratory. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p58">58</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p58">The advancement of cyberinfrastructure underpinned the
                        development of the digital humanities field that
                        applies computational tools and methods to the
                        humanities. The discipline of digital humanities is
                        based on the utilization of digital source
                        materials, digital methods, and new ways of
                        collaborating in the digital environment. The core
                        feature of the digital humanities is thus virtual
                        situatedness, defined as the digital, internet-based
                        workspace with an infrastructure, connection, and
                        operation that affect the work and research
                        communication. Scholars work in the virtual space,
                        including online platforms and the virtual research
                        environment, which directs digital humanities
                        research, supports the use of digital tools, and
                        enables scholarly collaboration. Digital humanities
                        scholars are thus examples of researchers who work
                        in both physical and virtual spaces. Therefore,
                        their research rooms comprise physical places, such
                        as a laboratory or center, as well as a virtual
                        laboratory. Hence, the concept of laboratory goes
                        beyond the category of physical location towards a
                        placeless and virtual idea not determined by walls
                        and physical situatedness. The virtual model of the
                        humanities lab plays a key role in the
                        cyberinfrastructure that enhances the web-based
                        research environment, supports national and
                        international collaborations, facilitates networks
                        of scholars, and provides data services, resources,
                        and tools.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p59">59</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p59">Given the scope of the function and the operation of the
                        virtual laboratory, the model comprises two types of
                        labs. The first is formed as a collaborative
                        platform for enhancing communication and cooperation
                        and promoting new modes of learning and research
                        with the use of digital tools and technologies.
                        HASTAC (Humanities, Arts, Science and Technology
                        Alliance and Collaboratory) constitutes a good
                        example of this initiative. It is a community-based
                        publishing and an academic social networking
                        platform that enables global communication, sharing,
                        and collaborations among students and researchers
                        across the humanities, social sciences, media
                        studies, the arts, and technology sectors. Alfalab
                        (2009-2011), in turn, was a collaborative network
                        and a virtual project of five institutes of the
                        Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences that
                        aimed to promote, provide, and apply the use of
                        digital tools and methods in the humanities research
                        practices and foster a cooperation of humanities
                        researchers at national and international levels. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p60">60</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p60">The second type, called the virtual research environment,
                        is a virtual space for facilitating digital research
                        processes, providing databases, tools, and services,
                        and promoting collaboration across the university,
                        academic institutions, and cultural organizations.
                        It is an innovative, web-based, and
                        community-oriented digital environment with an
                        international dimension, defined by Annamaria Carusi
                        and Torsten Reimer as a “set of
                        web applications, online tools, systems and
                        processes interoperating to facilitate or enhance
                        the research process within and without
                        institutional boundaries; it enables collaborative
                        research activities beyond geographical
                        barriers”
                        [<a class="ref" href="#carusi2010">Carusi et al. 2010</a>, 12]. Examples of
                        virtual research environments for the humanities are
                        the TextGrid Laboratory provided by DARIAH-DE;
                        DHVLab, the Digital Humanities Virtual Laboratory
                        carried out at the Ludwig Maximilian University of
                        Munich (it consists of a teaching and research
                        infrastructure in the applications and methods used
                        in the digital humanities); HuNI (Humanities
                        Networked Infrastructure), a virtual laboratory
                        developed as part of the Australian government’s
                        NeCTAR (National e-Research Collaboration Tools and
                        Resources) program (it is a platform that combines
                        data from many Australian cultural websites into the
                        humanities and creative arts database); the Digital
                        Humanities Innovation Lab (LINHD) at the National
                        University of Distance Education in Spain (a
                        laboratory that serves as a hub for infrastructures
                        and tools for digital humanities projects in Spain
                        and Spanish speaking countries); and the Nordic
                        Digital Humanities Laboratory (NDHL), the ongoing
                        initiative that aims to create convergence in Nordic
                        humanities and arts e-infrastructures through a
                        participant-driven virtual laboratory for
                        data-intensive research. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p61">61</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p61">Hence, the structure of the virtual model of the
                        humanities laboratory can be grasped through:
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="ptext">
                        <ul class="list">
                           <li class="item">Virtual situatedness – research and
                              collaboration processes take place in the digital
                              and shared workspace;
                           </li>
                           <li class="item">Technology and software – they are key
                              composers of virtual spaces and the main
                              conditions for sustaining, accessing, and using
                              the virtual laboratory;
                           </li>
                           <li class="item">Users-driven – the virtual lab is created for
                              and by the research community; thus, the
                              development of the virtual lab depends on users’
                              activities, support, and feedback;
                           </li>
                           <li class="item">Network approach – the main purpose of the lab
                              is building the interaction and collaboration
                              network between researchers, universities, and
                              organizations;
                           </li>
                           <li class="item">Service and resource-based project – the
                              virtual lab provides data services, digital
                              materials, tools, and an environment for research
                              practices and collaboration;
                           </li>
                           <li class="item">Terms and conditions – the lab space is
                              determined by the terms and conditions related to
                              access, using, and sharing the data and other
                              resources within the virtual platform.
                           </li>
                        </ul>
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p62">62</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p62">The advancement of cyberinfrastructure ushered in the era
                        of virtual laboratories, created in the digital
                        environment beyond physical, geographical, and
                        cultural borders. Similar to the center-type lab,
                        the techno-science and work station-type lab, the
                        virtual laboratory facilitates scholarly practices
                        and enables collaborative, innovative, and
                        technology-based projects. Hence, the virtual lab
                        represents a laboratory with the aspects
                        characterized by the rest of the models. The main
                        difference lies in situatedness; while the previous
                        labs are all determined by a physical location and
                        physical infrastructure, digital labs are signified
                        by virtual milieu and software. 
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Conclusions</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p63">63</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p63">The paper has shown that the laboratory turn has emerged in the
                     humanities as a part of a wider process of the
                     <em class="term">laboratorization</em> of social life, which
                     has been occurring since the 1980s and with a significant
                     intensification in the last ten years. The emergence of the
                     laboratory in the humanities is thus the effect of
                     superimposing three discourses that appeared in different
                     domains: in the humanities, social sciences, and culture.
                     Laboratories made inroads into the humanities, introduced
                     new methods and practices and put the humanities on a par
                     with applied science. A laboratory, however, is more than a
                     new infrastructure within the humanities, it is a “meeting place”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#humlab">HUMlab n.d.</a>], an “incubator
                     for new ideas”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#auhl">AU Humanities Lab n.d.</a>], and a “conceptual
                     vehicle”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#criticalmedia">Critical Media Lab n.d.</a>]. The lab becomes
                     conceptualized as a way of thinking entailing new social
                     practices and new research modes (collaboration,
                     experimentation, and hands-on practices). Hence, the
                     laboratory turn has been driven by the movement away from
                     building physical labs towards creating concept-based
                     laboratories (lab courses, lab projects). The study has
                     shown that the year of 2010 became a significant period in
                     the history of the laboratory in the humanities. The
                     Franklin Humanities Institute at Duke University established
                     a new model for the humanities labs, which gave rise to
                     conceptual laboratories seen more as problem-based projects
                     rather than physical work spaces. This essay has focused on
                     the application of the term “laboratory” to the
                     humanities field in the academy. Therefore, the issues of
                     the implementation of labs beyond this field and the
                     university’s campus remain still unexplored, including the
                     emergence of labs in GLAM sector, the formation of cultural
                     and citizens labs along with makerspaces and hackerspaces in
                     public domain, and the use of the word “lab” in
                     different areas of social life. Humanities labs constitute
                     part of the ongoing move towards turning various social
                     spaces and initiatives into a <em class="term">laboratory</em> that
                     is a good lever to intervene in local and global complex
                     problems, testing and scaling ideas, and designing
                     prototypes through a collaboration of experts and citizens. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p64">64</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p64">The second major finding was that the implementation of
                     laboratory emerged as the essential process in the
                     development of the humanities, one, which required the
                     reconstruction of infrastructure to support new research
                     practices and methods related to the utilization of
                     technology and digital tools. Therefore, the digital
                     humanities have become the driving force behind building a
                     laboratory space, which supports situated practices, the
                     collaborative, and technology-based projects. Furthermore,
                     the digital humanities have propelled the development of the
                     virtual laboratory, which involves virtual situatedness, a
                     collaborative and academic network, and the digital research
                     environment. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p65">65</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p65">The next significant finding to emerge from this study is that
                     borrowing the laboratory concept from science does not mean
                     imitating its form and features. The humanities have
                     developed unique models of labs differing in the scale of
                     operation, infrastructure, and functions: the center-type
                     lab, the techno-science lab, the work station-type lab, the
                     social challenges-centric lab, and virtual lab. The previous
                     section has shown that each type produces knowledge
                     resulting from a lab structure and mission. Humanities labs
                     do not represent a unified structure; instead, they consist
                     of a group of various types of labs, which have their own
                     architectures, goals, and practices. As a result, the
                     humanities lab does not simply imitate the science lab but
                     adapts this new infrastructure for its own purposes and
                     needs. What fascinates me here is also the way how the
                     humanities reposition themselves in the academy and public
                     domain by bringing the field into dialogue with the sciences
                     in interdisciplinary labs, building their own
                     infrastructure, and designing a lab as a site of
                     intervention in social challenges. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p66">66</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p66">This study has important implications for understanding the
                     concept of laboratory in the humanities as well as
                     developing new models and sites. However, one challenge of
                     the humanities lab remains to be discussed: its
                     sustainability. The problem of sustainability concerns any
                     model of laboratory [<a class="ref" href="#maron2014">Maron et al. 2014</a>]. It is a
                     question of maintaining the long-term viability of a lab and
                     sustaining the commitments of time and effort made by the
                     people who are the core of the laboratory. Through examining
                     lab projects that completed their activities (e.g., Alfalab,
                     2009-2011; the Computational Humanities Lab at the
                     University of Wisconsin–Madison, 2012-2014; the Digital
                     Cultures Lab at Douglas College, 2014-2018), it becomes
                     clear that it is a major concern requiring further
                     investigation. The Digital Matters Lab at the University of
                     Utah has taken action in that direction and chosen the topic
                     of “sustainability” for its activities and projects
                     through 2022. It aims to address the questions of the
                     accessibility of digital materials and the sustainability of
                     in-progress artefacts [<a class="ref" href="#dmlab">Digital Matters Lab n.d.</a>]. Thus, the
                     humanities lab is a fascinating phenomenon in the history of
                     the humanities and many issues regarding its infrastructure,
                     action, and impact require further analysis and reflection.
                     
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Acknowledgements</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p67">67</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p67">The research included in this article was presented during my
                     lecture, entitled “A Laboratory as
                     Critical Infrastructure in the Humanities” at
                     the workshop “Humanities Laboratories:
                     Critical Infrastructures and Knowledge
                     Experiments”, hosted by the Department of
                     Digital Humanities with King’s Digital Lab in conjunction
                     with the Critical Infrastructure Studies Initiative at
                     King’s College London on 23 May 2019. I thank the Department
                     of Digital Humanities at King’s College London for awarding
                     me the Willard McCarty Fellowship 2018/2019 and giving an
                     opportunity to share my research. I would like to thank the
                     participants at the workshop for the feedback I received. I
                     also thank two anonymous reviewers for their careful reading
                     and many insightful comments and suggestions. 
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
            </div>
            
            <div id="worksCited">
               <h2>Works Cited</h2>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="azhl">
                     <!-- close -->ASU Humanities Lab n.d.</span> Humanities Lab
                  at Arizona State University. <a href="https://humanities.lab.asu.edu/" onclick="window.open('https://humanities.lab.asu.edu/'); return false" class="ref">https://humanities.lab.asu.edu/</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="auhl">
                     <!-- close -->AU Humanities Lab n.d.</span> Humanities Lab. A
                  Research Center for the Humanities at American University.
                  <a href="http://auhumanitieslab.com/" onclick="window.open('http://auhumanitieslab.com/'); return false" class="ref">http://auhumanitieslab.com/</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="berry2011">
                     <!-- close -->Berry 2011</span> Berry, D. M. “The Computational Turn: Thinking About
                  the Digital Humanities”, Culture Machine, 12
                  (2011). 
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="bod2013">
                     <!-- close -->Bod 2013</span> Bod, R. <cite class="title italic">A New History of the Humanities: The Search for
                     Principles and Patterns from Antiquity to the
                     Present</cite>. Oxford University Press, New York
                  (2013).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="breithaupt2017">
                     <!-- close -->Breithaupt 2017</span> Breithaupt, F.
                  “Designing a Lab in the
                  Humanities”, <cite class="title italic">The
                     Chronicle of Higher Education</cite>, February 06,
                  2017. <a href="http://www.chronicle.com/article/Designing-a-Lab-in-the/239132" onclick="window.open('http://www.chronicle.com/article/Designing-a-Lab-in-the/239132'); return false" class="ref">http://www.chronicle.com/article/Designing-a-Lab-in-the/239132</a>. 
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="brown1989">
                     <!-- close -->Brown et al. 1989</span> Brown, J. S.,
                  Collins, A. and Duguid P. “Situated
                  Cognition and the Culture of Learning”,
                  <cite class="title italic">Educational Researcher</cite>,
                  18(1) (1989): 32-42.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="bérubé1995">
                     <!-- close -->Bérubé et al. 1995</span> Bérubé, M. and
                  Nelson, C. (eds). <cite class="title italic">Higher Education
                     under Fire. Politics, Economics and the Crisis of
                     the Humanities</cite>. Routledge, London and New
                  York (1995).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="carusi2010">
                     <!-- close -->Carusi et al. 2010</span> . Carusi, A.
                  and Reimer, T. “Virtual Research
                  Environment Collaborative Landscape Study”.
                  JISC (2010). <a href="http://www.jisc.ac.uk/media/documents/publications/vrelandscapereport.pdf" onclick="window.open('http://www.jisc.ac.uk/media/documents/publications/vrelandscapereport.pdf'); return false" class="ref">http://www.jisc.ac.uk/media/documents/publications/vrelandscapereport.pdf</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="cchl">
                     <!-- close -->Colby College Humanities Lab n.d.</span> Humanities Labs at Colby College. <a href="http://www.colby.edu/centerartshumanities/arts-and-humanities-labs/" onclick="window.open('http://www.colby.edu/centerartshumanities/arts-and-humanities-labs/'); return false" class="ref">http://www.colby.edu/centerartshumanities/arts-and-humanities-labs/</a>. 
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="collini2012">
                     <!-- close -->Collini 2012</span> Collini, S. <cite class="title italic">What Are Universities For?</cite>
                  Penguin Books, London (2012). 
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="coopmans2014">
                     <!-- close -->Coopmans et al. 2014</span> Coopmans,
                  C., Vertesi, J., Lynch, M. E., and Woolgar, S. (eds) <cite class="title italic">Representation in Scientific
                     Practice</cite>. Revisited. MIT Press, Cambridge
                  and London (2014). 
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="criticalmedia">
                     <!-- close -->Critical Media Lab n.d.</span> Critical Media Lab. “The Academy of Art
                  and Design FHNW in Basel”. <a href="https://www.ixdm.ch/critical-media-lab/" onclick="window.open('https://www.ixdm.ch/critical-media-lab/'); return false" class="ref">https://www.ixdm.ch/critical-media-lab/</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="dmlab">
                     <!-- close -->Digital Matters Lab n.d.</span> Digital
                  Matters Lab. “Theme:
                  Sustainability”, <a href="https://digitalmatters.utah.edu/digital-matters-lab/" onclick="window.open('https://digitalmatters.utah.edu/digital-matters-lab/'); return false" class="ref">https://digitalmatters.utah.edu/digital-matters-lab/</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="donoghue2008">
                     <!-- close -->Donoghue 2008</span> Donoghue, F.
                  <cite class="title italic">The Last Professors: The
                     Corporate University and the Fate of the
                     Humanities</cite>. Fordham University Press, New
                  York (2008).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="earhart2015">
                     <!-- close -->Earhart 2015</span> Earhart, A. E.
                  “The Digital Humanities as a
                  Laboratory”. In P. Svensson and D. T.
                  Goldberg (eds). <cite class="title italic">Between Humanities and
                     the Digital</cite>. MIT Press, Cambridge and London
                  (2015), pp. 391-400.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="emerson">
                     <!-- close -->Emerson et al. n.d.</span> Emerson, L.,
                  Parikka, J., Wershler, D. <cite class="title italic">The Lab Book.
                     Situated Practices in Media Studies</cite>.
                  University of Minnesota Press (forthcoming). <a href="https://manifold.umn.edu/projects/the-lab-book" onclick="window.open('https://manifold.umn.edu/projects/the-lab-book'); return false" class="ref">https://manifold.umn.edu/projects/the-lab-book</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="fhi">
                     <!-- close -->FHI-DU Humanities Labs n.d.</span> Humanities
                  Laboratories at the Franklin Humanities Institute at Duke
                  University. <a href="https://fhi.duke.edu/labs" onclick="window.open('https://fhi.duke.edu/labs'); return false" class="ref">https://fhi.duke.edu/labs</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="flanders2002">
                     <!-- close -->Flanders et al. 2002</span> Flanders,
                  J. and Unsworth, J. “The Evolution of
                  Humanities Computing Centers”, <cite class="title italic">Computers and the Humanities</cite>,
                  36 (2002): 379–380. 
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="foka2018">
                     <!-- close -->Foka et al. 2018</span> Foka, A. et al.
                  “Beyond Humanities qua Digital:
                  Spatial and Material Development for Digital
                  Research Infrastructures in HumlabX”, <cite class="title italic">Digital Scholarship in the
                     Humanities</cite> 33(2) (2018): 264-278. DOI: <a href="https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqx008" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqx008'); return false" class="ref">https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqx008</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="fraistat2012">
                     <!-- close -->Fraistat 2012</span> Fraistat, N.
                  “The Function of Digital
                  Humanities Centers at the Present Time”. In
                  M. K. Gold (ed). <cite class="title italic">Debates in the Digital
                     Humanities</cite>, University of Minnesota Press,
                  Minneapolis (2012). <a href="http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/debates/text/23" onclick="window.open('http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/debates/text/23'); return false" class="ref">http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/debates/text/23</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="galison1999">
                     <!-- close -->Galison et al. 1999</span> Galison, P.
                  and Thompson E. (eds). <cite class="title italic">The Architecture
                     of Science</cite>. MIT Press, Cambridge and London
                  (1999).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="gold2012">
                     <!-- close -->Gold 2012</span> Gold, M. K. (ed). <cite class="title italic">Debates in the Digital
                     Humanities</cite>. University of Minnesota Press,
                  Minneapolis (2012). <a href="http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/" onclick="window.open('http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/'); return false" class="ref">http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/</a>. 
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="goodman2014">
                     <!-- close -->Goodman 2014</span> Goodman, A. L.
                  “Digital Media Labs in
                  Libraries”, <cite class="title italic">Library
                     Technology Reports</cite>, August/September 50(6)
                  (2014). 
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="gottschall2008">
                     <!-- close -->Gottschall 2008</span> Gottschall, J.
                  “Literature, Science, and a New
                  Humanities”. Palgrave Macmillan, New York
                  (2008).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="greguska2019">
                     <!-- close -->Greguska 2019</span> Greguska, E.
                  “Confronting grand social
                  challenges with humanities”, <cite class="title italic">ASU Now: Access, Excellence,
                     Impact</cite>, February 21, 2019. <a href="https://asunow.asu.edu/20190221-solutions-confronting-grand-social-challenges-humanities" onclick="window.open('https://asunow.asu.edu/20190221-solutions-confronting-grand-social-challenges-humanities'); return false" class="ref">https://asunow.asu.edu/20190221-solutions-confronting-grand-social-challenges-humanities</a>. 
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="hal">
                     <!-- close -->HAL n.d.</span> Humanities Action Lab. <a href="https://www.humanitiesactionlab.org/about" onclick="window.open('https://www.humanitiesactionlab.org/about'); return false" class="ref">https://www.humanitiesactionlab.org/about</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="humlab">
                     <!-- close -->HUMlab n.d.</span> HUMlab at Umeå University.
                  <a href="http://www.humlab.umu.se/en" onclick="window.open('http://www.humlab.umu.se/en'); return false" class="ref">http://www.humlab.umu.se/en</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="hamilton2015">
                     <!-- close -->Hamilton et al. 2015</span> Hamilton,
                  M. and Hanke Schmidt, D. <cite class="title italic">Make It Here:
                     Inciting Creativity and Innovation in Your
                     Library</cite>. Libraries Unlimited, Santa Barbara,
                  CA (2015).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="hannaway1986">
                     <!-- close -->Hannaway 1986</span> Hannaway, O.
                  “Laboratory Design and the Aim
                  of Science: Andreas Libavius versus Tycho
                  Brahe”, <cite class="title italic">Isis</cite> 77
                  (1986): 585-610.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="hartwig2011">
                     <!-- close -->Hartwig 2011</span> Hartwig, D. “Guide to the Stanford Humanities Lab
                  Records”. <cite class="title italic">Online Archive
                     of California</cite> (2011). <a href="https://oac.cdlib.org/findaid/ark:/13030/kt3b69r9xx/entire_text/" onclick="window.open('https://oac.cdlib.org/findaid/ark:/13030/kt3b69r9xx/entire_text/'); return false" class="ref">https://oac.cdlib.org/findaid/ark:/13030/kt3b69r9xx/entire_text/</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="hassan2014">
                     <!-- close -->Hassan 2014</span> Hassan, Z. <cite class="title italic">The Social Labs Revolution: A New
                     Approach to Solving our Most Complex
                     Challenges</cite>. Berrett-Koehler, San Francisco
                  (2014).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="hatch2013">
                     <!-- close -->Hatch 2013</span> Hatch, M. <cite class="title italic">The Maker Movement Manifesto: Rules
                     for Innovation in the New World of Crafters,
                     Hackers, and Tinkerers</cite>. McGraw-Hill
                  Education, New York (2013). 
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="hiatt2005">
                     <!-- close -->Hiatt 2005</span> Hiatt, G. “We Need Humanities Labs”,
                  <cite class="title italic">Inside Higher Ed</cite>,
                  October 26, 2005. <a href="https://www.insidehighered.com/views/2005/10/26/we-need-humanities-labs" onclick="window.open('https://www.insidehighered.com/views/2005/10/26/we-need-humanities-labs'); return false" class="ref">https://www.insidehighered.com/views/2005/10/26/we-need-humanities-labs</a>. 
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="hd">
                     <!-- close -->Humanities + Design n.d.</span> Humanities +
                  Design a Research Lab at the Center for Spatial and Textual
                  Analysis at Stanford University. <a href="https://hdlab.stanford.edu/" onclick="window.open('https://hdlab.stanford.edu/'); return false" class="ref">https://hdlab.stanford.edu/</a>. 
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="ihde2009">
                     <!-- close -->Ihde 2009</span> Ihde, D. <cite class="title italic">Postphenomenology and Technoscience:
                     The Peking University Lectures</cite>. State
                  University of New York Press, Albany (2009). 
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="jay2014">
                     <!-- close -->Jay 2014</span> Jay, P. <cite class="title italic">The Humanities “Crisis” and the Future of
                     Literary Studies</cite>. Palgrave Macmillan, New
                  York (2014).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="johnson2016">
                     <!-- close -->Johnson 2016</span> Johnson, E. D. M.
                  “The Right Place at the Right
                  Time: Creative Spaces in Libraries”. In S. S.
                  Hines and K. Moore (eds). <cite class="title italic">The Future of
                     Library Space.</cite> Advances in Library
                  Administration and Organization 36 (2016): 1-36. 
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="joselow2016">
                     <!-- close -->Joselow 2016</span> Joselow, M. “Labs Are for the Humanities,
                  Too”, <cite class="title italic">Inside Higher
                     Ed</cite>, July 12, 2016. <a href="https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2016/07/12/conference-explores-humanities-labs" onclick="window.open('https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2016/07/12/conference-explores-humanities-labs'); return false" class="ref">https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2016/07/12/conference-explores-humanities-labs</a>. 
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="kagan2009">
                     <!-- close -->Kagan 2009</span> Kagan, J. <cite class="title italic">Three Cultures. Natural Sciences,
                     Social Sciences and the Humanities in the 21st
                     Century</cite>. Cambridge University Press,
                  Cambridge and New York (2009).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="kavanaghwebb2018">
                     <!-- close -->Kavanagh Webb 2018</span> Kavanagh
                  Webb, K. <cite class="title italic">Development of Creative Spaces
                     in Academic Libraries: A Decision Maker’s
                     Guide.</cite> Chandos Publishing, Cambridge, MA
                  (2018).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="kerr2001">
                     <!-- close -->Kerr 2001</span> Kerr, C. <cite class="title italic">The Uses of the University</cite>.
                  Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA (2001).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="kieboom2014">
                     <!-- close -->Kieboom 2014</span> Kieboom, M. <cite class="title italic">Lab Matters: Challenging the Practice
                     of Social Innovation Laboratories</cite>.
                  Kennisland, Amsterdam (2014). 
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="klein2005">
                     <!-- close -->Klein 2005</span> Klein, J. T. <cite class="title italic">Humanities, Culture, and
                     Interdisciplinarity. The Changing American
                     Academy</cite>. State University of New York Press,
                  Albany (2005). 
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="knorrcetina1995">
                     <!-- close -->Knorr Cetina 1995</span> Knorr
                  Cetina, K. “Laboratory Studies: The
                  Cultural Approach to the Study of Science”.
                  In S. Jasanoff, G. E. Markle, J. C. Peterson, T. Pinch
                  (eds). <cite class="title italic">Handbook of Science and
                     Technology Studies</cite>. Sage, Thousand Oaks, CA
                  (1995), pp. 140-166. 
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="kohler2008">
                     <!-- close -->Kohler 2008</span> Kohler, R. E. “Lab History”, <cite class="title italic">Isis</cite> 99 (2008):
                  761–768.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="kuhn1996">
                     <!-- close -->Kuhn 1996</span> Kuhn, T. S. <cite class="title italic">The Structure of Scientific
                     Revolutions</cite>. University of Chicago Press,
                  Chicago and London (1996). 
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="linhd">
                     <!-- close -->LINHD n.d.</span> Digital Humanities
                  Innovation Lab at the National University of Distance
                  Education. <a href="http://linhd.uned.es" onclick="window.open('http://linhd.uned.es'); return false" class="ref">http://linhd.uned.es</a>. 
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="lane2017">
                     <!-- close -->Lane 2017</span> Lane, R. <cite class="title italic">The Big Humanities: Digital
                     Humanities/Digital Laboratories</cite>. Routledge,
                  London and New York (2017).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="latour1987">
                     <!-- close -->Latour 1987</span> Latour, B. <cite class="title italic">Science in Action. How to Follow
                     Scientists and Engineers Through Society</cite>.
                  Harvard University Press, Cambridge (1987).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="latour1979">
                     <!-- close -->Latour et al. 1979</span> Latour, B. and
                  Woolgar, S. <cite class="title italic">Laboratory Life: The
                     Construction of Scientific Facts</cite>. Princeton
                  University Press, Princeton (1979).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="lynch1985">
                     <!-- close -->Lynch 1985</span> Lynch, M. <cite class="title italic">Art and Artifact in Laboratory
                     Science</cite>. Routledge &amp; Kegan Paul, London
                  (1985).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="mahey2019">
                     <!-- close -->Mahey et al. 2019</span> Mahey, M. et al.
                  “Open a GLAM Lab”.
                  Digital Cultural Heritage Innovation Labs, Book Sprint,
                  Doha, Qatar, 23-27 September, 2019. 
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="maron2014">
                     <!-- close -->Maron et al. 2014</span> Maron, N. L. and
                  Pickle, S. <cite class="title italic">Sustaining the Digital
                     Humanities. Host Institution Support beyond the
                     Start-Up Phase</cite>. Ithaka S+R (2014). <a href="https://doi.org/10.18665/sr.22548" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.18665/sr.22548'); return false" class="ref">https://doi.org/10.18665/sr.22548</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="moran2010">
                     <!-- close -->Moran 2010</span> Moran, S. “The Roles of Creativity in
                  Society”. In J. C. Kaufman and R. J.
                  Sternberg (eds). <cite class="title italic">The Cambridge Handbook
                     of Creativity</cite>. Cambridge University Press,
                  Cambridge (2010), pp. 74-90. 
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="openlab">
                     <!-- close -->OpenLab n.d.</span> OpenLab. Karolinska
                  Institute, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm
                  University and Södertörn University. City of Stockholm. <a href="http://openlabsthlm.se/" onclick="window.open('http://openlabsthlm.se/'); return false" class="ref">http://openlabsthlm.se/</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="commonwealth2006">
                     <!-- close -->Our Cultural Commonwealth 2006</span> Our Cultural
                  Commonwealth. “The report of the
                  American Council of Learned Societies Commission on
                  Cyberinfrastructure for the Humanities and Social
                  Sciences”. American Council of Learned
                  Societies, New York (2006).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="pask2018">
                     <!-- close -->Pask 2018</span> Pask, K. “In the Literature Lab”, <cite class="title italic">Modern Language Quarterly</cite>,
                  79(1) (2018): 1-24. DOI: <a href="https://doi.org/10.1215/00267929-4264249" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.1215/00267929-4264249'); return false" class="ref">https://doi.org/10.1215/00267929-4264249</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="pawlicka2017">
                     <!-- close -->Pawlicka 2017</span> Pawlicka, U.
                  “Data, Collaboration,
                  Laboratory: Bringing Concepts from Science into
                  Humanities Practice”, <cite class="title italic">English Studies</cite>, 98(5) (2017): 526-541.
                  <a href="https://doi.org/10.1080/0013838X.2017.1332022" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.1080/0013838X.2017.1332022'); return false" class="ref">https://doi.org/10.1080/0013838X.2017.1332022</a>. 
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="pawlicka-deger2019">
                     <!-- close -->Pawlicka-Deger 2019</span> Pawlicka-Deger, U. “(Digital)
                  Humanities and Media Labs Around the World”
                  [Data set]. Zenodo (2019). <a href="http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.2631219" onclick="window.open('http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.2631219'); return false" class="ref">http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.2631219</a>. 
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="pawlicka-deger">
                     <!-- close -->Pawlicka-Deger n.d.</span> Pawlicka-Deger, U. “Laboratory: A New
                  Space in Digital Humanities”. A. McGrail, A.
                  D. Nieves, S. Senier (eds). <cite class="title italic">Institutions, Infrastructures at the
                     Interstices</cite>. Debates in the Digital
                  Humanities. University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis
                  (Forthcoming).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="pickering1992">
                     <!-- close -->Pickering 1992</span> Pickering, A.
                  “From Science as Knowledge to
                  Science as Practice”. In A. Pickering (ed).
                  <cite class="title italic">Science as Practice and
                     Culture</cite>, University of Chicago Press,
                  Chicago and London (1992), pp. 1-26. 
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="pricelab">
                     <!-- close -->Price Lab n.d.</span> Price Lab for Digital
                  Humanities. “What We Do”,
                  University of Pennsylvania. <a href="https://pricelab.sas.upenn.edu/about/what-we-do" onclick="window.open('https://pricelab.sas.upenn.edu/about/what-we-do'); return false" class="ref">https://pricelab.sas.upenn.edu/about/what-we-do</a>. 
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="proske2013">
                     <!-- close -->Proske 2013</span> Proske, P. “Media Lab Melbourne. Interview with:
                  Pierre Proske”, <cite class="title italic">desktop</cite>, February 12, 2013. <a href="https://desktopmag.com.au/features/media-lab-melbourne/" onclick="window.open('https://desktopmag.com.au/features/media-lab-melbourne/'); return false" class="ref">https://desktopmag.com.au/features/media-lab-melbourne/</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="readings1996">
                     <!-- close -->Readings 1996</span> Readings, B.
                  <cite class="title italic">The University in
                     Ruins</cite>. Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
                  Massachusetts and London (1996).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="ricaurte2018">
                     <!-- close -->Ricaurte Quijano 2018</span> Ricaurte
                  Quijano, P. “Citizen Laboratories and
                  Digital Humanities”, <cite class="title italic">Digital Humanities Quarterly</cite>, 12(1) (2018).
                  <a href="http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/12/1/000352/000352.html" onclick="window.open('http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/12/1/000352/000352.html'); return false" class="ref">http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/12/1/000352/000352.html</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="rockwell2010">
                     <!-- close -->Rockwell 2010</span> Rockwell, G.
                  “As Transparent as
                  Infrastructure. On the research of
                  cyberinfrastructure in the humanities”. In J.
                  McGann (ed). <cite class="title italic">Online Humanities
                     Scholarship: The Shape of Things to Come,
                     Proceedings of the Mellon Foundation Online
                     Humanities Conference at the University of
                     Virginia</cite>, Rice University Press, Houston
                  (2010), pp. 461-487.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="sample2010">
                     <!-- close -->Sample 2010</span> Sample, M. “On the Death of the Digital Humanities
                  Center”. <cite class="title italic">Sample
                     Reality</cite>, March 26, 2010. <a href="http://www.samplereality.com/2010/03/26/on-the-death-of-the-digital-humanities-center/" onclick="window.open('http://www.samplereality.com/2010/03/26/on-the-death-of-the-digital-humanities-center/'); return false" class="ref">http://www.samplereality.com/2010/03/26/on-the-death-of-the-digital-humanities-center/</a>. 
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="scholarslab">
                     <!-- close -->Scholars' Lab n.d.</span> Scholars’ Lab
                  at the University of Virginia Library. “About”, University of Virginia. <a href="https://scholarslab.lib.virginia.edu/about/" onclick="window.open('https://scholarslab.lib.virginia.edu/about/'); return false" class="ref">https://scholarslab.lib.virginia.edu/about/</a>. 
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="smithies2017">
                     <!-- close -->Smithies et al. 2017</span> Smithies,
                  J. et al. “Mechanizing the Humanities?
                  King’s Digital Lab as Critical Experiment”,
                  Digital Humanities 2017, DH2017, ADHO Conference in
                  Montreal, 10 August (2017). <a href="https://jamessmithies.org/blog/2017/08/17/mechanizing-humanities-kings-digital-lab-critical-experiment/" onclick="window.open('https://jamessmithies.org/blog/2017/08/17/mechanizing-humanities-kings-digital-lab-critical-experiment/'); return false" class="ref">https://jamessmithies.org/blog/2017/08/17/mechanizing-humanities-kings-digital-lab-critical-experiment/</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="smithies2020">
                     <!-- close -->Smithies et al. 2020</span> Smithies,
                  J. and Ciula, A. “Humans in the Loop:
                  Epistemology &amp; Method in King’s Digital
                  Lab”. In. S. Dunn and K. Schuster (eds).
                  <cite class="title italic">Routledge International
                     Handbook of Research Methods in Digital
                     Humanities</cite>. Routledge, London (2020).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="stratilatis2014">
                     <!-- close -->Stratilatis 2014</span> Stratilatis,
                  C. “University rankings and the
                  scientification of social sciences and
                  humanities”, <cite class="title italic">Ethics in
                     Science and Environmental Politics</cite>, 13
                  (2014): 177-192.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="svensson2015">
                     <!-- close -->Svensson 2015</span> Svensson, P.
                  “The Humanistiscopes: Exploring
                  the Situatedness of Humanities
                  Infrastructure”. In P. Svensson and D. T.
                  Goldberg (eds). <cite class="title italic">Between Humanities and
                     the Digital</cite>. MA. MIT Press, Cambridge and
                  London (2015), pp. 337-354.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="svensson2016">
                     <!-- close -->Svensson 2016</span> Svensson, P.
                  <cite class="title italic">Big Digital Humanities:
                     Imagining a Meeting Place for the Humanities and the
                     Digital</cite>. University of Michigan Press, Ann
                  Arbor (2016). DOI: <a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.3998/dh.13607060.0001.001" onclick="window.open('http://dx.doi.org/10.3998/dh.13607060.0001.001'); return false" class="ref">http://dx.doi.org/10.3998/dh.13607060.0001.001</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="svensson2018">
                     <!-- close -->Svensson 2018</span> Svensson, P.
                  “Contemporary and Future Spaces
                  for Media Studies and Digital Humanities”. In
                  J. Sayers (ed). <cite class="title italic">Routledge Companion to
                     Media Studies and Digital Humanities</cite>.
                  Routledge, New York (2018), pp. 152-161.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="thorp2010">
                     <!-- close -->Thorp et al. 2010</span> Thorp, H. and
                  Goldstein, B. <cite class="title italic">Engines of Innovation:
                     The Entrepreneurial University in the Twenty-First
                     Century</cite>. University of North Carolina Press,
                  Chapel Hill (2010).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="tiesinga2014">
                     <!-- close -->Tiesinga et al. 2014</span> Tiesinga,
                  H. and Berkhout, R. (eds) <cite class="title italic">Labcraft: How
                     Social Labs Cultivate Change Through Innovation and
                     Collaboration</cite>. Labcraft Publishing, London
                  and San Francisco (2014). 
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="wenger1998">
                     <!-- close -->Wenger 1998</span> Wenger, É. <cite class="title italic">Communities of Practice: Learning,
                     Meaning, and Identity</cite>. Cambridge University
                  Press, Cambridge (1998). 
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="wissema2009">
                     <!-- close -->Wissema 2009</span> Wissema J. G. <cite class="title italic">Towards the Third Generation
                     University: Managing the University in
                     Transition</cite>. Edward Elgar Publishing,
                  Cheltenham (2009). 
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="dhlab">
                     <!-- close -->Yale DH Lab n.d.</span> Digital Humanities
                  Laboratory at Yale University Library. “Our Mission”. <a href="https://dhlab.yale.edu/about.html" onclick="window.open('https://dhlab.yale.edu/about.html'); return false" class="ref">https://dhlab.yale.edu/about.html</a>. 
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="zorich2008">
                     <!-- close -->Zorich 2008</span> Zorich, D. <cite class="title italic">A Survey of Digital Humanities Centers
                     in the United States</cite>. Council on Library and
                  Information Resources, Washington (2008).
               </div>
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar"><a href="#">Preview</a>  |  <span style="color: grey">XML</span> |  <a href="#" onclick="javascript:window.print();" title="Click for print friendly version">Print Article</a></div>
         </div>
      </div>
   </body>
</html>