<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
      <title>[PREVIEW] DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly: </title>
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_screen.css" media="screen" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_print.css" media="print" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" /><style type="text/css">
        #mainContent {
          float: none;
          padding-top: 2em;
          padding-left: 4em;
          padding-right: 4em;
          margin-left: 225px;
           
        }</style></head>
   <body>
      <div id="mainContent">
         <div class="DHQarticle">
            <div id="pubInfo">Preview<br />Volume  Number 
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar">
               <form id="taporware" action="get">
                  <div><a href="//preview/index.html">Preview</a>
                      | 
                     <a rel="external" href="//vol///000549.xml">XML</a>
                     
                     | 
                     		   Discuss
                     			(<a href="/dhq/vol///000549/000549.html#disqus_thread" data-disqus-identifier="000549">
                        				Comments
                        			</a>)
                     
                  </div>
               </form>
            </div>
            
            <div class="DHQheader">
               
               
               
               
               <h1 class="articleTitle lang en">A Model for Representing Diachronic
                  Terminologies: the Saussure Case Study
               </h1>
               
               
               <div class="author"><span style="color: grey">Silvia Piccini</span> &lt;<a href="mailto:" onclick="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate(''); return false;" onkeypress="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate(''); return false;"></a>&gt;, Institute for Computational Linguistics
               </div>
               
               <div class="author"><span style="color: grey">Andrea Bellandi</span> &lt;<a href="mailto:" onclick="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate(''); return false;" onkeypress="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate(''); return false;"></a>&gt;, Institute for Computational Linguistics
               </div>
               
               <div class="author"><span style="color: grey">Emiliano Giovannetti</span> &lt;<a href="mailto:" onclick="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate(''); return false;" onkeypress="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate(''); return false;"></a>&gt;, Institute for Computational Linguistics
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               <span class="Z3988" title="url_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;rft_val_fmt=info%3Aofi%2Ffmt%3Akev%3Amtx%3Ajournal&amp;rfr_id=info%3Asid%2Fzotero.org%3A2&amp;rft.genre=article&amp;rft.atitle=A%20Model%20for%20Representing%20Diachronic%20Terminologies%3A%20the%20Saussure%20Case%20Study&amp;rft.jtitle=Digital%20Humanities%20Quarterly&amp;rft.stitle=DHQ&amp;rft.issn=1938-4122&amp;rft.date=&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.aulast=Piccini&amp;rft.aufirst=Silvia&amp;rft.au=Silvia%20Piccini&amp;rft.au=Andrea%20Bellandi&amp;rft.au=Emiliano%20Giovannetti"> </span></div>
            
            
            <div id="DHQtext">
               
               
               <div id="abstract">
                  <h2>Abstract</h2>
                  
                  
                  <p>The aim of this article is to present a model for representing in an explicit and
                     formal way the diachronic evolution of concepts and terms in a given domain, so
                     that this formalization can be machine-actionable. The approach we here propose
                     is based on Semantic Web technologies in order to guarantee interoperability and
                     reuse across scientific communities of diachronic terminological resources that
                     can be thus easily accessed, interconnected and mutually enriched. More
                     specifically, the representation of dynamic evolution of terms and concepts was
                     performed in OWL using the N-ary relations mechanisms. In addition, a set of
                     SWRL rules was set up, in order to automatically identify the evolution of the
                     concepts evoked within a text, as well as the terms representing these concepts.
                     Our model was adopted to formally represent diachronic aspects of Saussure’s
                     terminology as they emerge from his works. An example will be provided to
                     highlight the potential of such a knowledge structuration for gaining a wider
                     understanding of the profound terminological and conceptual changes brought
                     about by the paradigmatic and epistemological revolutions in sciences.
                  </p>
                  
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">1. Introduction</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p1">1</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p1">Πάντα ῥεῖ. Everything is subjected to the inexorable law of change: the reality,
                     the categories through which we organize it and the words we use to talk about
                     it.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p2">2</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p2">This is particularly the case for the history of science. Over the centuries,
                     scholars have built different theoretical models in response to the continuous
                     innovation that emerged from observation sometimes producing a real scientific
                     revolution in the worldview. Needless to say, a change in conceptual level often
                     corresponds to a change in terminology<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e242">[1]</a>: new terms can be introduced to
                     express the new system of concepts or old terms can be dismissed when the
                     concept becomes obsolete. The aim of this article is to present a model for
                     formally representing the diachronic evolution of concepts and terms in a given
                     domain, so that this formalization can be machine-actionable. Taking advantage
                     from past experiences conducted in the context of several projects<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e250">[2]</a>, we propose here an approach based on
                     Semantic Web technologies that guarantees interoperability and reuse of
                     diachronic terminological resources across scientific communities.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p3">3</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p3">The development of standards for representing and exchanging data has always been
                     a concern in the terminological field. Interoperability across terminological
                     formats is basically ensured by adopting the ISO standard 30042: 2008 TBX
                     (TermBase eXchange), an XML-based family of terminology exchange formats
                     compliant with the Terminological Markup Framework (TMF - ISO 16642: 2003).
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p4">4</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p4">Over the last few years, interesting solutions for interoperability have been
                     offered by the Semantic Web technologies and the Linked Open Data initiative
                     which allow data to be shared, reused across applications and linked with the
                     resources available on the Web, thus benefiting from the whole datacloud of URIs
                     with which reference resources like DBpedia are already networked.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p5">5</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p5">In terminology, there has been a growing trend towards representing and
                     publishing terminological resources on the Semantic Web according to Linked Open
                     Data principles, as demonstrated for example by the NCBO (National Center for
                     Biomedical Ontology) BioPortal, a repository of more than 300 biomedical
                     ontologies and terminologies converted into RDF [<a class="ref" href="#salvadores2013">Salvadores et al. 2013</a>];
                     or by the Open Biomedical Ontologies (OBO) consortium [<a class="ref" href="#smith2007">Smith et al. 2007</a>]
                     aiming to create a family of new or extant ontologies based on shared principles
                     compliant with the Semantic Web technologies. These and other similar
                     initiatives are all driven by the same need, namely to avoid that terminologies,
                     created by proprietary software, exist independently of each other, hidden in
                     isolated databases. The lack of semantic interoperability, indeed, precludes any
                     possibility of progress, as medical data can be exploited to their full
                     potential only if they are interconnected to each other. Sharing large
                     quantities of data structured in ontologies makes it possible to use IT
                     applications and artificial intelligence systems, enabling thus better
                     diagnostics, early disease prevention and, more generally, a deeper
                     understanding of the human biology and health.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p6">6</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p6">Another initiative deserving to be mentioned is the EuroVoc management based on
                     technologies in line with W3C recommendations and with the latest developments
                     in classification standards. A collaborative project started in 2019 and
                     undertaken by the Publications Office of the European Union and the
                     International Labour Office [<a class="ref" href="#dechandon2019">Dechandon et al. 2019</a>] aims to align EuroVoc
                     with other controlled vocabularies and publish them as Linked Open Data. The
                     objective is to improve data accessibility and guarantee large-scale
                     interoperability, thus facilitating the authoring-translating-publishing chain
                     as well as the work in public administrations and international
                     organisations.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p7">7</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p7">Finally, Cimiano et al. (<a href="#cimiano2015">2015</a>) proposed an
                     approach to convert terminological datasets originally stored in TBX format to
                     RDF by means of an online service named TBX2RDF, allowing thereby terminological
                     resources to be used and enhanced across different scientific communities and,
                     in particular, to become part of the great Linguistic Linked (Open) Data cloud
                     (see <span class="foreign i">infra</span>).
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p8">8</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p8">Nevertheless, as we shall see, using these technologies to represent the
                     diachronic evolution of terminological and conceptual data constitutes an
                     interesting challenge, since OWL (Web Ontology Language), the W3C standard
                     language developed to represent ontologies in the Semantic Web, is fundamentally
                     static and monotonic.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">2. Terminology and diachrony</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p9">9</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p9">In the terminological literature, the diachronic dimension has been neglected for
                     a long time. This was mainly due to the onomasiological, prescriptive and static
                     approach underlying the General Theory of Terminology (GTT) elaborated by Wüster
                     in 1968.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p10">10</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p10">Wüster’s approach to terminology was based on a neo-positivist referential and
                     taxonomic semiotics [<a class="ref" href="#slodzian2000">Slodzian 2000</a>], according to which concepts
                     take precedence over words. In GTT terms are monosemic and concepts are
                     monoreferential; a perfect correspondence is established between them: each
                     concept corresponds to one and only one term. The term is thus equivalent to a
                     symbol, to a “désignateur rigide”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#kripke1995">Kripke 1995</a>], since it works in much the same way as the system
                     of proper names works in general language. Conceptual structures, on the other
                     hand, are regarded as universal and static like their referents and any
                     diachronic dimension is neutralised.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p11">11</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p11">In outlining the theoretical and methodological differences between lexicology
                     and terminology, Cabré (<a href="#cabre1999">1999: 8</a>) emphasized that
                     terminology is only concerned with synchronic aspects: 
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>This
                           view, which today is considered the most systematic, coherent theoretical
                           approach to terms, differs from lexicological theory in three ways: in the
                           priority of the concept over the designation; in being exclusively concerned
                           with the level of the terminological unit and not with the other levels of
                           linguistic description; in excluding any diachronic approach of
                           information.
                        </p>
                     </blockquote>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p12">12</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p12">Terminology began to open up to diachrony timidly after the “odyssée terminotique”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#slodzian2000">Slodzian 2000</a>] of the 80s, when an impressive number of term
                     banks, based on the synchronic traditional vision of the Viennese school, were
                     produced and spread (EURODICATOAM, NORMATERM, UNITERM, TERMIUM, IATE etc.). In
                     1988 a symposium entitled “Terminologie diachronique”
                     was organized by the Centre de Terminology of Bruxelles, but ten years after
                     Møller (1998) still regretted a “quantitative and / or
                     qualitative deficit” in that branch of terminology for which he
                     coined the neologism “terminochronie”. Over the last twenty
                     years several studies have been conducted focussing on the evolution of concepts
                     and terms in specialized languages (see inter al. <a href="#vancampenhoudt1997">van Campenhoudt 1997</a>, <a href="#dury2008">Dury 2008</a>, <a href="#zanola2014">Zanola
                        2014</a>, <a href="#kristiansen2014">Kristiansen 2014</a>), as well
                     as on methods for compiling diachronic corpora [<a class="ref" href="#dury2004">Dury 2004</a>] and
                     identifying the evolution of knowledge in corpora [<a class="ref" href="#picton2009">Picton 2009</a>].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p13">13</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p13">As underlined by Dury and Picton (<a href="#dury2009">2009</a>), this lack
                     of interest for diachronic aspects in terminology was mainly due to technical,
                     pragmatic, psychological, and most of all theoretical and historical obstacles.
                     Diachronic terminology is, indeed, by definition a textual terminology [<a class="ref" href="#bourigault1999">Bourigault and Slodzian 1999</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#pearson1998">Pearson 1998</a>], a terminology of “discourse”.
                     Terms must be analysed in their real context of use and must not be seen as
                     abstract and static labels associated with concepts. They should be rather
                     regarded as linguistic signs, which enter into a dynamic relationship both with
                     the concepts and with the other linguistic signs that constitute the
                     terminological system. In a diachronic perspective, terminological work is
                     fundamentally semasiological and descriptive. In order to grasp terminological
                     variation over time, the starting point is the sense that a term acquires within
                     a real linguistic context and the focus is on language as it is actually used
                     (<cite class="title italic">Ist-Norm</cite>) in real specialised (con-)texts and
                     not on language as it should be used (<span class="foreign i">Soll-Norm</span>). To use
                     Bourigault and Slodzian words (<a href="#bourigault1999">1999: 31</a>),
                     “le texte est le point de départ de la description
                     lexicale à construire. On va du texte vers le terme”.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p14">14</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p14">Texts are usually the unique source that the scholars have at their disposal in
                     order to access disappeared states of languages and more completely understand
                     the history of terms and their evolution over time. Texts play a crucial role to
                     establish when and how words acquire (terminologization) and lose
                     (determinologization) their terminological status, or how a term passes from one
                     specialized field to another or from the intimate pages of a scholar to the
                     entire scientific community.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p15">15</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p15">Regarding this last aspect, in particular, texts constitute a precious means to
                     record the typical terminological fluctuation that precedes or follows the
                     formation of the so-called “normal science” state. As a
                     matter of fact, in a phase of “normal science”, when the
                     development of knowledge is adherent to what Kuhn (<a href="#kuhn1970">1970</a>) calls “paradigm”, the system of terms is
                     standard, explicitly defined and consensually used within a scientific
                     community. In revolutionary phases, on the contrary, when a revision of existing
                     scientific beliefs or practices is involved, terminology can be characterized by
                     great instability. Texts become thus a conceptual and terminological space of
                     creativity, where scholars think, reflect and give a linguistic form to their
                     ideas. In these cases, ephemeral lexical formations are often attested only in
                     the idiolect of the one who forged them without ever taking root within the
                     scientific community.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p16">16</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p16">An example of this phenomenon will be illustrated in Section 6 with Saussure’s
                     terminology.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head"> 3. Modelling an Interoperable Terminological Resource</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p17">17</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p17">When modelling a digital scholarly resource, the key point is to choose a model
                     capable of maximizing its usefulness in the community of reference. According to
                     the “FAIR guidelines”, scholarly data should be
                     Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable [<a class="ref" href="#wilkinson2016">Wilkinson et al. 2016</a>]. First of all, for data to be findable, they must be referred to using a
                     globally unique and persistent identifier and must also be indexed in a
                     searchable resource. Furthermore, data must be accessible through a standardized
                     protocol and, at the same time, has to be interoperable in virtue of its
                     representation in a formal and shared knowledge representation language.
                     Finally, to be reusable, data must be “described with a
                     plurality of accurate and relevant attributes” (<a href="#wilkinson2016">ibidem: 4</a>).
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p18">18</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p18">In order to pursue the FAIR policies and to build fair diachronic terminological
                     resources, our choice was to adopt the paradigms of Semantic Web technologies
                     [<a class="ref" href="#bernerslee2001">Berners-Lee et al. 2001</a>] Linked (Open) Data [<a class="ref" href="#bizer2011">Bizer et al. 2011</a>].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p19">19</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p19">The intuition behind the Semantic Web is to shift from a Web of documents, viewed
                     as separate data silos containing unstructured or semi-structured data, to a Web
                     of data where open repositories of semantically enriched data can be accessed
                     and interlinked. To make this vision concrete, the following technologies -
                     often referred to as the Semantic Web layer cake or Semantic Web technology -
                     are used: Resource Description Framework<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e437">[3]</a>
                     (RDF), RDF Schema (RDFS), Web Ontology Language (OWL), Semantic Web Rule
                     Language (SWRL) and SPARQL Protocol and RDF Query Language (SPARQL).
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p20">20</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p20">Semantic Web and Linked (Open) Data best practices require datasets to be
                     published using RDF: data is described as triples in the form of Subject -
                     Predicate - Object, where the Subject is a resource, the Object can be either a
                     resource or a data value (such as a string of character or a number), and the
                     Predicate (also called “property”) relates the Subject and
                     the Object together. Basically, a dataset in the Linked Data world is a set of
                     triples.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p21">21</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p21">OWL is a family of languages, based on RDF/XML, and recommended by the World Wide
                     Web Consortium since 2004 for representing and sharing ontologies<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e451">[4]</a>
                     on the Web. There are three variants of OWL, with different levels of
                     expressiveness: OWL Lite, which supports a classification hierarchy and simple
                     constraints; OWL DL, which provides the maximum expressiveness while retaining
                     computational completeness and decidability, and OWL Full which allows for
                     maximum expressiveness, resulting nonetheless undecidable.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p22">22</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p22">In order to publish structured data on the Web in a way that they can be easily
                     linked to each other, a number of rules was set up by Berners-Lee, known as
                     Linked (Open) Data principles. According to them, each entity of a dataset must
                     be uniquely identified by a special “address” called URI
                     (Uniform Resource Identifier), each URI must be available on the Web via the
                     HTTP protocol<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e466">[5]</a>,
                     each look up of a URI must be answered with useful information and using
                     standards, and finally, whenever possible, data should be linked to other
                     data.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p23">23</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p23">Over the last years, the Linked (Open) Data approach has attracted the attention
                     of a linguistic community becoming more and more sensitive to the question of
                     interoperability between resources. An increasing number of openly available and
                     interconnected linguistic datasets have been published as part of the Web of
                     data, resulting in the so-called Linked Open Data Cloud (LLOD). This trend,
                     nicely visualised in <a href="https://lod-cloud.net" onclick="window.open('https://lod-cloud.net'); return false" class="ref">https://lod-cloud.net</a>, is particularly boosted by the Ontology
                     Lexicon (Ontolex) community group, whose activity resulted in the creation of
                     <cite class="title italic">lemon</cite><a class="noteRef" href="#d4e478">[6]</a> (Lexicon Model for Ontologies), a meta-model
                     allowing lexical resources to be published in RDF, linked and shared according
                     to Semantic Web principles. At present <cite class="title italic">lemon</cite>
                     constitutes a standard <span class="foreign i">de facto</span>, as it is grounded on W3C and
                     ISO standards, such as LMF (Lexical Markup Framework) [<a class="ref" href="#francopoulo2006">Francopoulo et al. 2006</a>], Lexinfo [<a class="ref" href="#cimiano2011">Cimiano et al. 2011</a>] – this
                     latter aligned with ISOCat - and LIR (Linguistic Information Repository) [<a class="ref" href="#montiel2008">Montiel-Ponsoda 2008</a>].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p24">24</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p24"><cite class="title italic">Lemon</cite> has been successfully adopted in many
                     different contexts for different purposes, such as, for example, to publish
                     several existing lexical resources as linked data, including DBnary [<a class="ref" href="#serasset2015">Sérasset 2015</a>], the Parole-Simple-Clips Italian lexicon [<a class="ref" href="#delgratta2015">Del Gratta et al. 2015</a>], WordNet [<a class="ref" href="#mccrae2014">McCrae et al. 2014</a>], UBY [<a class="ref" href="#ecklekohler2015">Eckle-Kohler 2015</a>] and BabelNet [<a class="ref" href="#ehrmann2014">Ehrmann et al. 2014</a>], to
                     represent linguistic resources for sentiment analysis within the EuroSentiment
                     project [<a class="ref" href="#sanchezrada2014">Sánchez-Rada et al. 2014</a>], to model linguistic annotations in
                     FrameBase, a linked open knowledge base which integrates and interconnects
                     heterogeneous sources of structured knowledge [<a class="ref" href="#rouces2017">Rouces et al. 2017</a>].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p25">25</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p25">The lemon core module, named <cite class="title italic">ontoLex</cite><a class="noteRef" href="#d4e530">[7]</a>, is composed of
                     three fundamental elements: i) the <cite class="title italic">Lexical Entry</cite>
                     class, in turn specified in <cite class="title italic">Word</cite>, <cite class="title italic">Multiword Expression</cite>, and <cite class="title italic">Affix</cite>; ii) the <cite class="title italic">Lexical Form</cite> class
                     where the morphological variants of a lexical entry are described and associated
                     with a written representation (<cite class="title italic">writtenRep</cite>); iii)
                     the <cite class="title italic">Lexical Sense</cite> class, which constitutes the
                     reification of the relationship between a lexical entry and an ontology entity
                     defined in a given “external” ontology. In <cite class="title italic">lemon</cite>, in fact, concepts, conceived as
                     extra-linguistic entities, receive a formal and explicit description in a
                     separate ontology, according to the principle known as “semantics by reference”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#buitelaar2010">Buitelaar 2010</a>].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p26">26</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p26">The <cite class="title italic">lemon</cite> model has been designed to be modular and
                     extensible: in other words, new modules can be created, if required, to
                     represent a peculiar aspect of a lexical or terminological resource. To manage
                     semantic shifts, for example, a diachronic extension, called <cite class="title italic">lemonDIA</cite>, was developed [<a class="ref" href="#khan2014">Khan et al. 2014</a>].
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">4. Models and Tools for the representation of diachrony</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p27">27</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p27">Knowledge representation languages underlying Semantic Web technologies are based
                     on binary relations. They typically connect two instances without any temporal
                     information, thus making the representation of time a difficult matter to deal
                     with. In order to tackle this issue, different approaches have been proposed in
                     the literature (see <cite class="title italic">inter al.</cite>
                     <a href="#flouris2008">Flouris 2008</a>, <a href="#makri2011">Makri
                        2011</a>): Temporal Description logics [<a class="ref" href="#artale2000">Artale and Franconi 2000</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#lutz2008">Lutz et al. 2008</a>], Versioning [<a class="ref" href="#klein2001">Klein and Fensel 2001</a>], Reification
                     [<a class="ref" href="#kanmani2016">Kanmani 2016</a>] and 4D-fluents [<a class="ref" href="#welty2006">Welty et al. 2006</a>]. In
                     the following, a brief description of each approach is provided.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p28">28</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p28"><cite class="title italic">Temporal Description Logics (TDL</cite>). Description
                     logics (DLs) [<a class="ref" href="#baader2003">Baader et al. 2003</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#baader2001">Baader and Sattler 2001</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#calvanese2001">Calvanese et al. 2001</a>] are a family of knowledge representation
                     formalisms underlying the Ontology Web Language (OWL-DL). They are a decidable
                     subset of first-order logic. TDLs extend DL with standard temporal logic
                     operators such as “always in the future”, and “until”. Many TDLs have been proposed in the literature
                     [<a class="ref" href="#artale2000">Artale and Franconi 2000</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#lutz2008">Lutz et al. 2008</a>] with the most expressive of them being undecidable.
                     Extending DL entails to extend OWL, which is based on DL. Since OWL is a W3C
                     recommendation (2004) for publishing and sharing ontologies in a “Semantic Web vision”, adopting TDL would entail to
                     abandon the Semantic Web framework. On the contrary, the other approaches
                     described in the following can be implemented using OWL directly.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p29">29</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p29"><em class="emph">Versioning</em>. Another strategy commonly adopted to handle and keep
                     track of ontology modifications in time is versioning: whenever a change takes
                     place, a new version of the resource is created (see Figure 1). Several works
                     are grounded on this approach: Grandi (<a href="#grandi2009">2009</a>)
                     presents a multi-temporal RDF database model employing triple timestamping with
                     temporal elements; Zekri et al. (<a href="#zekri2017">2017</a>) present an
                     infrastructure and a suite of tools to support the creation and validation of
                     OWL ontologies with time-varying instances; in Tappolet and Bernstein (<a href="#tappolet2009">2009</a>), the usage of Named Graphs is
                     proposed.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p30">30</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p30">The drawback of versioning approach is mainly twofold. Firstly, the fact that a
                     new version of the whole resource needs to be created every time a change occurs
                     leads to redundant information. Secondly, the more numerous the versions of the
                     resource are, the more complex and time-consuming the performance of exhaustive
                     searches becomes.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="figure">
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     <div class="caption">
                        <div class="label">Figure 1. </div><em class="emph">Versioning</em> - when a change takes place, a new version of the
                        resource is created.
                     </div>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p31">31</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p31"><em class="emph">Reification</em>. Reification is a technique for representing
                     relationships with arity greater than two.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e668">[8]</a> Reifying a
                     relationship means representing it as a class of entities. The N-ary Relations
                     pattern, conceived to model a relationship as a resource, is based on
                     reification.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="figure">
                     
                     
                     
                     <div class="caption">
                        <div class="label">Figure 2. </div>Example related to the fact that the sense of the term ti denotes the
                        concept cj (a) example of reification - (b) example of N-ary relation
                        pattern.
                     </div>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p32">32</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p32">Figure 2(a) illustrates how the reification process works: the relation
                     <em class="emph">denotes</em> is transformed into a class, here named <cite class="title italic">Reified relation</cite>. The subject and the object of
                     <em class="emph">denotes</em>, as well as the relation itself, become the attributes
                     of the new class. Let us suppose that the relation <em class="emph">denotes</em> links a
                     term t<span class="hi subscript">i</span> (in particular its specific sense) to a
                     concept c<span class="hi subscript">j</span> at a specific time T<span class="hi subscript">0</span>. As shown in Figure 2(b), the relationship <em class="emph">denotes</em>(t<span class="hi subscript">i</span>, c<span class="hi subscript">j</span>, T<span class="hi subscript">0</span>) can be reified as the new class <cite class="title italic">DenotationEvent</cite> with three binary relations:
                     <em class="emph">denotes</em>(t<span class="hi subscript">i</span>, d<span class="hi subscript">e</span>), <em class="emph">denotes</em>(d<span class="hi subscript"></span>e, c<span class="hi subscript">j</span>), and <em class="emph">time</em>(d<span class="hi subscript">e</span>, T<span class="hi subscript">0</span>). The first two relations link t<span class="hi subscript">i</span> to c<span class="hi subscript">j</span> by means of d<span class="hi subscript">e</span>, which is an instance of the class <cite class="title italic">DenotationEvent</cite>. The third relation assigns a temporal
                     extent T<span class="hi subscript">0</span> to d<span class="hi subscript">e</span>,
                     representing the temporal validity of the original property
                     <em class="emph">denotes</em>(t<span class="hi subscript">i</span>, c<span class="hi subscript">j</span>).
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p33">33</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p33">The main disadvantages of this technique are that: i) the complexity of the
                     ontology increases due to the proliferation of entities, both classes and
                     properties (as a matter of fact, whenever a temporal relation has to be
                     represented, a new object is created); ii) the OWL reasoning capabilities become
                     limited [<a class="ref" href="#welty2006">Welty et al. 2006</a>] and can be maintained only by means of
                     time-consuming strategies, since the reified property is transformed into a
                     class and the characteristics which can be added to a property in OWL (such as
                     functionality, inverse functionality, transitivity or symmetry) are no longer
                     associated directly with the relation itself.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p34">34</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p34"><em class="emph">4D-fluents (four-dimensionalist).</em> The basic idea underlying this
                     approach is that each entity has a temporal part, described by a set of time
                     slices. Each slice represents a temporal period, in which all the features of an
                     entity remain constant. Changes affect the properties of the temporal part
                     keeping the entity unchanged. In order to add the time dimension to a resource,
                     the <cite class="title italic">TimeSlice</cite> and <cite class="title italic">Time
                        Interval</cite> classes with the <cite class="title italic">timeSliceOf</cite>
                     and <cite class="title italic">timeInterval</cite> properties need to be introduced,
                     as Figure 3 depicts. Returning to the previous example, in the 4D-fluents
                     approach, the property <em class="emph">denotes</em> would connect instances of the
                     <cite class="title italic">TimeSlice</cite> class and would hold between slices
                     of entities. The time slices of an entity have a specific lifetime, that is the
                     time interval of the relation they participate in.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p35">35</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p35">As in the N-ary model so also in the 4-D fluents approach the domain and the
                     range of the property <em class="emph">denotes</em> change, both represented by the
                     <cite class="title italic">TimeSlice</cite> class. So, this model as well suffers
                     from some limitations in OWL reasoning capabilities. With respect to the N-ary
                     model, the 4-D fluents approach is affected by a wider proliferation of entities
                     (compare the blue objects in Figure 2).
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="figure">
                     
                     
                     
                     <div class="caption">
                        <div class="label">Figure 3. </div>Example of 4D-fluents representation.
                     </div>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p36">36</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p36">So far, the main mechanisms for representing time evolving information were
                     illustrated. In the next two subsections, we present a vocabulary to represent
                     time-related facts, i.e. OWL-Time, and a set of rules, i.e. SWRL, which operate
                     on temporal relations to infer new temporal knowledge and to detect inconsistent
                     assertions.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">4.1 OWL-Time and Allen’s relations</h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p37">37</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p37">OWL-Time<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e837">[9]</a> is an ontology of
                        temporal concepts, conceived to describe the temporal properties of
                        resources. It provides a vocabulary for expressing facts about topological
                        relations among instants and intervals, together with information about
                        durations and date-time. Figure 4(a) illustrates a diagram of OWL-Time
                        ontology. The properties <cite class="title italic">hasTemporalDuration</cite>,
                        <cite class="title italic">hasBeginning</cite>, <cite class="title italic">hasEnd</cite>, and <cite class="title italic">hasTime</cite> provide a
                        standard way to attach time information to ontological entities.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p38">38</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p38">Let us consider, for example, that the term t<span class="hi subscript">i</span>
                        denotes the concept c<span class="hi subscript">j</span> from 1898 to 1903. In this
                        case all the needed temporal facts can be specified using OWL-Time
                        vocabulary.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p39">39</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p39">However, if we wanted to answer questions like “What are
                        the intervals overlapping the interval 1898-1903?”, or “what are the relations holding in that interval?”,
                        OWL-Time vocabulary would not be enough. James F. Allen (<a href="#allen1983">1983</a>) provided then a calculus for temporal
                        reasoning, by introducing thirteen base relations capturing the possible
                        relations between two intervals (see Figure 4(b)). They allow the
                        computation of any relative position or sequence. In the context of the
                        Semantic Web, these rules can be represented by means of the Semantic Web
                        Rule Language (SWRL), described in the following section. The use of this
                        language makes it possible to assert new instances of relationships between
                        the ontology entities.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="figure">
                        
                        
                        
                        <div class="caption">
                           <div class="label">Figure 4. </div>(a) OWL-Time - the core model of temporal entities. (b) Allen’s rules
                           between time periods.
                        </div>
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">4.2 Semantic Web Rule Language</h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p40">40</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p40">Semantic Web Rule Language<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e892">[10]</a> (SWRL) is a
                        language based on a subset of Datalog with both unary and binary predicates,
                        representing the rule layer within the Semantic Web stack. The form of these
                        rules is an implication between an antecedent (body) and a consequent
                        (head), each consisting of zero or a conjunction of more atoms.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e896">[11]</a> Whenever the conditions
                        specified in the antecedent hold, then the conditions specified in the
                        consequent must hold as well. Atoms can be of the form C(x), P(x,y),
                        sameAs(x,y), differentFrom(x,y), or builtIn(r,x,...) where <em class="term">C</em> is
                        an OWL description or data range, <em class="term">P</em> is an OWL property,
                        <em class="term">r</em> is a built-in relation, <em class="term">x</em> and <em class="term">y</em>
                        are either variables or OWL individuals or OWL data values, as appropriate.
                        For example, the following SWRL rule infers if an instant <em class="term">i<span class="hi subscript">1</span></em> is before an instant <em class="term">i<span class="hi subscript">2</span></em>, by verifying a set of premises:
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p41">41</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p41">Instant(?i<span class="hi subscript">1</span>) ∧ Instant(?i<span class="hi subscript">2</span>) ∧ inXSDDateTime(?i<span class="hi subscript">1</span>, ?y) ∧
                        inXSDDateTime(?i<span class="hi subscript">2</span>, ?w) ∧
                        <br />swrl:lessThan(?y, ?w) <br />→ before(?i<span class="hi subscript">2</span>,
                        ?i<span class="hi subscript">1</span>)
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p42">42</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p42">where the built-in swrl:lessThan(?y, ?w) is satisfied when the date
                        represented by the variable ?y is earlier than that represented by
                        ?w.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e954">[12]</a> In this case,
                        when temporal information is provided as a date, the qualitative relations
                        are specified using SWRL rules that apply on the quantitative
                        representation. The rules can be applied to qualitative temporal information
                        as well. In the following, a rule about the relation <em class="emph">during</em> is
                        provided:
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p43">43</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p43">ProperInterval(?a) ∧ ProperInterval(?x) ∧ before(?b, ?y) ∧ before(?z, ?c) ∧
                        <br />hasBeginning(?a, ?b) ∧ hasBeginning(?x, ?y) ∧ hasEnd(?a, ?c) ∧
                        hasEnd(?x, ?z) <br />→ During(?x, ?a)
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">5. Adding Time to Terminologies</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p44">44</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p44">Given the different approaches to modelling time described in the previous
                     section, we chose to adopt the N-ary model.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p45">45</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p45">The reason for this choice is twofold. First of all, the N-ary relations approach
                     is supported by the Ontology Engineering and Patterns Task Force of the Semantic
                     Web Best Practices and Deployment Working Group.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e984">[13]</a> Secondly, with
                     respect to the perdurantist approach, the N-ary model requires the introduction
                     of a smaller number of objects and thus “outperforms the
                     4D-fluents representation in terms of required assertions (axioms) and
                     consequently in reasoning time”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#batsakis2017">Batsakis et al. 2017</a>, 14].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p46">46</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p46">In order to formalize terminology evolution following the N-ary approach, we took
                     inspiration from the model introduced by Preventis et al. (2014)<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e996">[14]</a> to handle temporal
                     ontologies in OWL. In particular, we introduced the following entities: 
                     <ul class="list">
                        <li class="item">the class <em class="emph">Event</em>, which represents the reification of a
                           property holding in a certain time. To model the class <cite class="title italic">Event</cite> we used the relative type <cite class="title italic">dcmitype:Event</cite> taken from the Dublin Core
                           Metadata Initiative (DCMI) and defined as a “non-persistent, time-based occurrence”<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e1014">[15]</a>;&gt;
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">the object property <em class="emph">during</em>, having the class <cite class="title italic">dcmitype:Event</cite> as domain and the class <cite class="title italic">time:ProperInterval</cite> of the OWL-Time ontology
                           as range. The latter is defined as “a temporal
                           entity with non-zero extent or duration, i.e. for which the value of
                           the beginning and end are different”.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e1033">[16]</a>
                           <em class="emph">during</em> has been modelled as a sub-property of <cite class="title italic">dcterms:date</cite> (described as a “point or period of time associated with an event in
                           the lifecycle of the resource”) of the DCMI
                           vocabulary<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e1047">[17]</a>;
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">the object property <cite class="title italic">temporalProperty</cite>,
                           which relates individuals of the class <cite class="title italic">dcmitype:Event</cite> respectively to the source and to the target
                           individuals of the original property which has been reified. As we will
                           see in detail shortly, the object properties that are converted into
                           temporal ones are formalised as sub-properties of <cite class="title italic">temporalProperty</cite>.
                        </li>
                     </ul>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p47">47</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p47">Following the N-ary approach outlined above, the terminological layer of our
                     model was formalised by extending the <em class="emph">lemon</em> model. The model does
                     not contain a complete collection of linguistic categories; consequently, it
                     builds on Lexinfo ontology<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e1070">[18]</a>
                     in order to provide a vocabulary to describe the properties of linguistic
                     objects. More specifically, the four lexico-semantic relationships defined in
                     Lexinfo, namely synonymy, antonymy, hypernymy, hyponymy<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e1075">[19]</a> were
                     “temporalised” (<cite class="title italic">temporalSynonym</cite>, <cite class="title italic">temporalAntonym</cite>,
                     <cite class="title italic">temporalHypernym</cite>, and <cite class="title italic">temporalHyponym</cite>) and thus converted into sub-properties of <cite class="title italic">temporalProperty</cite> to indicate their involvement in a
                     temporal event. The same was done for the properties <cite class="title italic">ontolex:reference</cite>, which links every individual of the <cite class="title italic">ontolex:LexicalSense</cite> class to a concept defined in an
                     ontology, and <cite class="title italic">ontolex:sense</cite>, linking an individual
                     of the class <cite class="title italic">ontolex:LexicalEntry </cite>to a specific
                     sense.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p48">48</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p48">In addition, each of these relations was reified and converted into subclasses of
                     the class <cite class="title italic">dcmitype:Event</cite>: <cite class="title italic">senseEvent</cite> representing the reification of sense relation, <cite class="title italic">referenceEvent</cite> representing the reification of the
                     relation linking a sense and an ontology concept, <cite class="title italic">equivalentEvent</cite>, <cite class="title italic">incompatibleEvent</cite>,
                     <cite class="title italic">broaderEvent</cite>, <cite class="title italic">narrowerEvent</cite> representing respectively the reification of
                     synonymy, antonymy, hypernymy, hyponymy relations holding between two
                     senses.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p49">49</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p49">The class <cite class="title italic">dcmitype:Event</cite> as well as its subclasses
                     mentioned above are related to the class <cite class="title italic">time:ProperInterval</cite> through the object property
                     <em class="emph">during</em>.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p50">50</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p50">So, for example, in order to represent the temporal synonymy (Figure 5), the
                     class <cite class="title italic">equivalentEvent</cite> is related to the class
                     <cite class="title italic">time:ProperInterval</cite> through the relation <cite class="title italic">temporalSynonym</cite>, specifying the time period in which
                     the relation of synonymy holds between two senses.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p51">51</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p51">As we can see, the introduction of an intermediate object, namely the individual
                     of the class <cite class="title italic">equivalentEvent</cite>, splits the static
                     relation linking a subject and an object into two parts. Instead of a single
                     triple linking two senses (<cite class="title italic">s<span class="hi subscript">1</span></cite> sense <cite class="title italic">s<span class="hi subscript">2</span></cite>), two triples are created, in which the individual of the
                     class <cite class="title italic">equivalentEvent</cite> appears as subject in one
                     case and as object in the other.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="figure">
                     
                     
                     
                     <div class="caption">
                        <div class="label">Figure 5. </div>Synonymy is represented as a temporal event that occurs during an
                        interval: sense sa of a certain lexical entry is asserted to be synonym of
                        sense sb of another lexical entry in a specific time interval i.
                     </div>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p52">52</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p52">However, this is not enough. As we underlined above, to define in which period a
                     term is used with a certain sense and to denote a specific concept, scholars
                     need to resort to textual sources.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p53">53</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p53">As a result, our model is based on the key concept of attestation; more
                     specifically, the senses of a term are linked to the text where they are
                     attested, and for each text the writing time is defined by means of specific
                     relations. To represent texts and attestations, as the main entities
                     constituting the textual layer of our model, we introduced the following
                     entities: 
                     <ul class="list">
                        <li class="item">the class <cite class="title italic">Text</cite>, which represents every
                           work produced in a written form. As many methodological and theoretical
                           works have underlined over the years, the notion of text is highly
                           complex and culturally rich and, thus, difficult to define and
                           formalize. A detailed discussion is beyond the scope of this article.
                           The term “text” is to be understood here in a broad
                           sense, including entities that are very different from each other, such
                           as books, published articles, handwritten notes, drafts of unfinished
                           works etc. It can be considered equivalent to the type
                           “<em class="term">Text</em>” as defined in the Dublin
                           Core Metadata Initiative Type Vocabulary (<cite class="title italic">dcmitype:Text</cite>), namely a “resource
                           whose content is primarily words for reading”.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e1219">[20]</a> If scholars need
                           to use vocabularies providing more subtle distinctions, many models for
                           representing documents in Linked Data have been already proposed,
                           offering an opportunity for high quality bibliographic data to be
                           exposed to the Semantic Web, such as FRBR (Functional Requirements for
                           Bibliographic Records) [<a class="ref" href="#carlyle2011">Carlyle 2011</a>] or Bibframe
                           (Bibliographic Framework) [<a class="ref" href="#kroeger2013">Kroeger 2013</a>]. Importantly
                           enough, if a different vocabulary is adopted, the validity of our model
                           is not compromised;
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">the object property <cite class="title italic">hasAttestation</cite>, which
                           relates a sense, instance of the class <cite class="title italic">ontolex:LexicalSense</cite>, to an instance of the class <cite class="title italic">dcmitype:Text</cite>; a few works about the modeling
                           of the attestation of a term in a document have been already done [<a class="ref" href="#khan2017">Khan et al. 2017</a>]
                           [<a class="ref" href="#bellandi2017a">Bellandi et al. 2017a</a>]; for the sake of reuse of existing
                           vocabularies we adopted the hasAttestation property defined by the LAWD
                           (Linked Ancient World Data) ontology<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e1244">[21]</a>;
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">the object property <cite class="title italic">hasWritingTime</cite>,
                           defined as a subproperty of <cite class="title italic">dcterms:date</cite>,
                           which relates an individual of the class <cite class="title italic">dcmitype:Text</cite> to an individual belonging to the class
                           <cite class="title italic">time:ProperInterval</cite> of the OWL-Time
                           ontology.
                        </li>
                     </ul> It is up to the scholar to define the boundaries of the writing
                     interval, which can be qualitative or quantitative. In fact, only in rare cases
                     he/she can define with certainty the extent of the period in which an author has
                     worked on drafting a text, with the aid of internal elements or external sources
                     (for example, the author explicitly declares that he has written that work in a
                     certain period, etc.).
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p54">54</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p54">In most cases, on the contrary, temporal information on the writing process is
                     vague and ambiguous and partially bounded intervals (“before
                     X”, “after Y”, etc.) need to be defined.
                     Instead of specifying the exact duration or the starting and ending points in
                     time, scholars describe intervals with respect to their mutual relations, by
                     establishing the terminus post quem or the <span class="foreign i">terminus ante
                        quem</span>, namely the limits of the possible range of dates in which a work
                     has been written.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e1277">[22]</a></div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p55">55</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p55">As for published texts, instead of the hasWritingTime property, the dcterms:
                     issued<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e1282">[23]</a> can be used, with the year
                     of publication constituting the end of the drafting period. An overview
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p56">56</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p56">An overview of the model is illustrated in Figure 6. Figure</div>
                  
                  <div class="figure">
                     
                     
                     
                     <div class="caption">
                        <div class="label">Figure 6. </div>Overview of the proposed model. (a) the textual layer is constituted by
                        texts and attestation. (b) the terminological layer relies on a N-ary
                        version of <span class="foreign i">ontolex</span>, where each reified class is an event
                        having a temporal extent. (c) the ontological layer concerns the formal
                        definitions of the concepts denoted by the terms and it is described with
                        OWL
                     </div>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p57">57</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p57">To take maximum advantage of the adoption of OWL as the representation language
                     of the resource, we have also conceived a set of SWRL rules to automatize the
                     attribution of some temporal information.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p58">58</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p58">The following rule states that, if a sense is attested in a text written in a
                     certain time interval, then that sense “exists” during the
                     same interval.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p59">59</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p59">Text(?t) ^ time:ProperInterval(?i) ^ hasWritingTime(?t, ?i) ^
                     ontolex:LexicalEntry(?l) ^ ontolex:LexicalSense(?s)<br /> ^ isAttestedIn(?s, ?t)
                     ^ ontolex:sense(?l, ?s) ^<br /> swrlx:createOWLThing(?se, ?s)<br /> ⇾
                     SenseEvent(?se) ^ temporalSense(?l, ?se) ^ temporalSense(?se, ?s) ^ during(?se,
                     ?i)
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p60">60</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p60">More specifically, given a text <em class="emph">t</em> written in a time interval
                     <em class="emph">i</em> (defined as an instance of time:ProperInterval), and given a
                     lexical entry <em class="emph">l</em> with a lexical sense s (these two related to each
                     other through the synchronic ontolex:sense relation) attested in text
                     <em class="emph">t</em>, then <em class="emph">l</em> has sense <em class="emph">s</em> (in a
                     diachronic perspective) during the interval <em class="emph">i</em>. The premise of the
                     rule is composed of the following steps: i) an anonymous individual se is
                     created ex novo in the antecedent part of the rule using the createOWLThing
                     built-in relation<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e1345">[24]</a>;
                     ii) se is defined, in the consequent part, as an event representing the reified
                     relation (in particular by instantiating it as a member of the class
                     SenseEvent); iii) the property temporalSense is used to relate the lexical entry
                     <em class="emph">l</em> to <em class="emph">se</em> and, in turn, to relate <em class="emph">se</em> to
                     sense <em class="emph">s</em>; iv) finally, the event <em class="emph">se</em> is defined as
                     happening in the same time interval <em class="emph">i</em> during which the text has
                     been written.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p61">61</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p61">If the sense of a lexical entry is attested in more than one text (each one
                     written in a specific temporal interval), the rule will be fired for each text,
                     relating thus the lexical entry to that sense in a more complex period
                     constituted of multiple time intervals
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p62">62</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p62">Similarly, the temporal validity of the ontolex:reference relation, linking each
                     ontolex:LexicalSense to one and only one concept of an ontology, can be inferred
                     from the writing time of the text as well, using the following SWRL rule:
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p63">63</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p63">Text(?t) ^ time:ProperInterval(?i) ^ hasWritingTime(?t, ?int) ^<br />
                     ontolex:LexicalSense(?s) ^ isAttestedIn(?s, ?t) ^ Concept(?c) ^
                     ontolex:reference(?s,<br /> ?c) ^ swrlx:createOWLThing(?re, ?c)<br /> ⇾
                     ReferenceEvent(?re) ^ temporalReference(?s, ?re) ^ temporalReference(?re, ?c)
                     ^<br /> during(?re, ?i)
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p64">64</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p64">If a sense <em class="emph">s</em> is linked to a concept <em class="emph">c</em> through the
                     (synchronic) ontolex:reference property, and if s is attested in a specific text
                     t written in the time interval i, then, in a diachronic perspective, the
                     relation reference holds in the same time interval <em class="emph">i</em> as well. In
                     other words, the fact that a word is used with a particular sense in a specific
                     text is equivalent to saying that in that period that term was used to express
                     that specific concept.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p65">65</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p65">Figure 7 and 8 show respectively how the temporal versions of <cite class="title italic">ontolex</cite> relations ontolex:sense and ontolex:reference
                     can be automatically inferred by a reasoner and represented in our N-ary model
                     starting from the writing time of texts.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="figure">
                     
                     
                     
                     <div class="caption">
                        <div class="label">Figure 7. </div>Classes and properties appearing in solid lines constitute the synchronic
                        part of the resource: elements in dashed lines, representing the temporal
                        version of the <cite class="title italic">ontolex:sense relation</cite>, can be
                        automatically implied by the firing of the SWRL rule.
                     </div>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="figure">
                     
                     
                     
                     <div class="caption">
                        <div class="label">Figure 8. </div>Temporalization via reification of the <cite class="title italic">ontolex:reference</cite> relation.
                     </div>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p66">66</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p66">We are also working at defining other rules taking into account the relations of
                     synonymy, antonymy, hypernymy, and hyponymy, with the aim of automatizing the
                     creation of their diachronic counterparts, with the addition of Allen’s
                     relations described in Section 4.1.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">6. The construction of a diachronic resource: the Saussure case study</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p67">67</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p67">Ferdinand de Saussure (Geneva, 1857-1913), the father of general linguistics,
                     never published his theories on general linguistics and semiotics in an organic
                     work. He strove to structure the flow of his thoughts and ideas in handwritten
                     notes, which are often characterized by a synthetic, fragmentary and hermetic
                     nature. These manuscripts display an obsessive and constant search for clear,
                     effective and unambiguous terms, against the “ineptie de la
                     terminologie courante” (Letter to Meillet written in 1984, see <a href="#benveniste1964">Benveniste 1964</a>). He changed the meaning to
                     some terms over time, assigned additional specific meanings to already existing
                     terms, used some expressions ephemerally, and even forged new words.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p68">68</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p68">This terminological fluctuation reflects the difficulties underlying every
                     process of theoretical creation and sheds light on the evolutionary dynamics
                     through which concepts take shape and cut through language to finally find their
                     linguistic expression.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p69">69</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p69">This process of <span class="foreign i">rumination</span>
                     [<a class="ref" href="#fenoglio2012">Fenoglio 2012</a>] is typical when dealing with theoretical
                     terminologies as in the case of Saussure, who tries to revolutionize the current
                     linguistic vision and to lay the foundations of linguistics as a science.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p70">70</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p70">Saussure’s terminology has been the subject of numerous studies [<a class="ref" href="#godel1957">Godel 1957</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#engler1968">Engler 1968</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#cosenza2016">Cosenza 2016</a>]. In 2011 the first electronic thesaurus of
                     Saussure's terminology, named <cite class="title italic">Simple_FdS</cite>
                     [<a class="ref" href="#ruimy2013">Ruimy et al. 2013</a>], was built as part of the project “Per una edizione digitale dei manoscritti di F. de
                     Saussure”, coordinated by the President of the Cercle Ferdinand de
                     Saussure Daniele Gambarara.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p71">71</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p71">The architecture of <cite class="title italic">Simple_FdS</cite> was based on the
                     lexical model SIMPLE [<a class="ref" href="#lenci2000">Lenci et al. 2000</a>] and was therefore inspired by
                     the Generative Lexicon theory elaborated by Pustejovsky (<a href="#pustejovsky1995">1995</a>). The Generative Lexicon theory, mainly
                     applied to general language, has proved to be very effective in the description
                     of specialized language and terminological lexicons as well (for example <a href="#arauz2012">Aráuz et al. 2012</a>, <span class="error"><a href="#sanchezibanez2014">Sánchez Ibáñez and García Palacios 2014</a></span>),
                     as it makes it possible to enrich the range of conceptual relations which is
                     traditionally based on generic-specific and part-whole relations.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p72">72</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p72">Initially, the electronic lexicon was conceived as static and no diachronic
                     aspects were taken into account. Recently, as we shall illustrate in Section
                     6.1, the model here proposed has been adopted to convert this terminological
                     resource from a static repository into a dynamic one.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p73">73</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p73">As underlined in Section 2, in diachronic terminology the textual dimension plays
                     a crucial role. Consequently, the first step was to build a good corpus, able to
                     represent the diachronic evolution we want to study. The texts included in
                     Saussure’s corpus can be considered as highly representative of diachronic
                     evolution of Saussure’s terminology, embracing all the thirty seven years in
                     which the intellectual activity of the Geneva linguist unfolded. The period
                     covered by the corpus ranges from 1874 - when Saussure wrote his first <cite class="title italic">Essai pour réduire les mots du grec, du latin &amp; de
                        l'allemand a un petit nombre de racines</cite> - until 1911, the year in
                     which he took the third course of general linguistics, the last academic
                     teaching held before his death, which occurred in 1913 after a long illness.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p74">74</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p74">Let us see in detail an example of the formalisation of the terminological
                     changes occurring in Saussure's writings.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">6.1 Temporalizing Saussure's terminology: the case of
                        <span class="foreign i">signe</span></h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p75">75</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p75">As is well known, Saussure's theories have been particularly influential in
                        semiotic studies. He emphasized first the dyadic and complex nature of
                        linguistic sign, which consists of two heterogeneous entities: a signifier
                        (<span class="foreign i">signifiant</span>), namely the hearer’s psychological
                        impression of a sound, and a signified (<span class="foreign i">signifié</span>), namely
                        a concept, an abstract idea. This terminology - still in use today - was
                        introduced by the Genevan linguist at the end of his life, after a long
                        theoretical reflection emerging in many of his handwritten pages.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p76">76</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p76">Here, as an example, the concept of SIGNIFIER was chosen and the formal
                        representation of the different terms Saussure used over time to designate
                        this concept is illustrated, in accordance with the N-ary model we propose
                        here.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p77">77</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p77">In the following, the relationships and the classes taken from existing
                        standard vocabularies will be indicated with prefixes of the respective
                        vocabularies.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p78">78</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p78">The concept of SIGNIFIER is denoted by many different terms in Saussurean
                        manuscripts, such as <span class="foreign i">signe</span>, <span class="foreign i">image
                           acoustique</span>, <span class="foreign i">image verbale</span>, <span class="foreign i">image
                           vocale</span>, <span class="foreign i">image auditive</span>,
                        <span class="foreign i">son</span>, <span class="foreign i">forme</span>.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p79">79</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p79">More specifically, the term signe is attested intermittently from 1891 to
                        1911 in many works, such as <cite class="title italic">De la double essence du
                           langage, Status et Motus, Notes Item, Troisième Cours de linguistique
                           générale</cite> etc. To formally represent this, the instance
                        signe_sense, belonging to the ontolex:LexicalSense class, was created and
                        linked - by means of the relation isAttestedIn - to the instances of the
                        class Text representing all the works where the term occurs.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p80">80</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p80">The writing period of each text was formally defined. Here the case of <cite class="title italic">Double Essence du language</cite> is shown.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p81">81</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p81">The instance Double_Essence_Writing_Time of the class time:properInterval
                        (subclass of time:Interval) was created and linked to the instance
                        Double_Essence through the relation hasWritingTime. The writing interval of
                        this work, which is supposed to range from 1891 to 1892,<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e1568">[25]</a> was formally defined by linking the instance
                        Double_Essence_Writing_Time through the relation time:hasBeginning to an
                        instance of the class time:Instant, defined by the Data Property XSDDateTime
                        with value “1891-01-01T00:00:00” as well as
                        through the relation time:hasEnd to an instance of the class time:Instant,
                        defined by the Data Property XSDDateTime with value “1892-12-31T00:00:00”. The same formalisation was performed for
                        each work where this sense of signe was attested.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p82">82</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p82">As described in Section 5, on the basis of N-ary approach here adopted,
                        <span class="foreign i">ontolex</span> relations were reified and the following
                        classes were introduced as subclass of Event: BroaderEvent (reification of
                        the hypernym relation); NarrowerEvent (reification of the hyponym relation);
                        IncompatibleEvent (reification of the antonymy relation); EquivalentEvent
                        (reification of the synonymy relation), ReferenceEvent (reification of the
                        inter-level relation reference) and finally senseEvent (reification of the
                        relation linking a lexical entry to its senses).
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p83">83</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p83">By firing the two rules illustrated in Section 5, the classes ReferenceEvent
                        and SenseEvent were automatically populated. More specifically, in
                        accordance with the first rule, the instance signe_sense_ts was created and
                        linked by means of the relation temporalSense both to signe_sense
                        (individual of ontolex:LexicalSense class) and to signe_entry (individual of
                        the ontolex:LexicalEntry class). Similarly, by firing the second rule, the
                        individual signe_sense_ref_signifiant_concept was created and linked by the
                        relation temporalReference both to signe_sense and to an ontology concept,
                        described in the <cite class="title italic">Simple_FdS</cite> ontology.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p84">84</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p84">As underlined above, a terminological fluctuation can be observed in
                        Saussure's work as regard to the designation of the concept SIGNIFIER.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p85">85</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p85">An attempt to completely renew semiotic terminology is attested in the
                        so-called <cite class="title italic">Notes Items</cite>. In these handwritten
                        pages, defined by Stetter (<a href="#stetter1979">1979</a>) as a
                        “fragment sémiologique central”, Saussure’s
                        reflection upon linguistic sign achieved extraordinary theoretical heights.
                        Many heterodox neologisms were introduced, such as <span class="foreign i">sème</span>,
                        <span class="foreign i">sème linguistique</span>, <span class="foreign i">aposème</span>,
                        <span class="foreign i">kenôme</span>, <span class="foreign i">sôme</span>,
                        <span class="foreign i">contre-sôme</span> etc. Here the
                        “material” part of linguistic sign, namely the
                        “signifier”, is denoted in certain passages by the
                        term <span class="foreign i">aposème</span>.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p86">86</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p86">This terminology is abandoned later and the term <span class="foreign i">signe</span>
                        continues to be used to indicate at the same time the
                        “material” part of the linguistic sign and the whole,
                        namely the combination of SIGNIFIED (concept) and SIGNIFIER (acoustic
                        image).
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p87">87</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p87">In order to avoid the confusion that the polysemy of the term
                        <span class="foreign i">signe</span> generated in his students, Saussure introduced
                        in extremis the term <span class="foreign i">signifiant</span>, during his last course
                        on general linguistics in 1911. He proposed thus to retain the word
                        <span class="foreign i">signe</span> to designate the linguistic entity as a whole,
                        and to replace the dyad signe and concept respectively by
                        <span class="foreign i">signifiant</span> and <span class="foreign i">signifié</span>.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p88">88</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p88">To formalise this terminological fluctuation, the instance
                        signe_sense_syn_aposème_sense of the EquivalentEvent class was created and
                        the static triple (signe_sense lexinfo:synonymy aposème_sense) was split
                        into the following two triples in accordance with the N-ary model: (signe
                        temporalSynonym signe_sense_syn_aposème_sense) and
                        (signe_sense_syn_aposème_sense temporalSynonym aposème). The instance
                        signe_sense_syn_aposème_sense was then linked to the interval
                        Notes_Item_Writing_Interval by means of the relation during.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p89">89</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p89">In a similar way, the instance signe_sense_syn_signifiant_sense of the
                        EquivalentEvent class was created and linked via temporalSynonym to the
                        individual signifiant. The instance signe was in turn linked - by means of
                        the same relation - to the instance signe_sense_syn_signifiant_sense,
                        belonging to the reified class EquivalentEvent. Finally, the instance was
                        linked to the interval troisième_Cours_Interval (with beginning 1910 and end
                        1911) by means of the relation during.
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">6.2 Querying Saussure's diachronic terminology</h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p90">90</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p90">Such a formalization, even if complex and redundant, makes it possible to
                        reconstruct on a timeline the evolution of the lexical-semantic
                        relationships between senses as well as the relations holding between senses
                        and concepts, and then to answer complex and sophisticated queries. Here are
                        just a few of the many queries which can be performed: 
                        <ul class="list">
                           <li class="item">Which are the terms used over time to denote a concept
                              <em class="emph">c</em>?
                           </li>
                           <li class="item">Which are the terms attested in a specific time interval i and
                              used to denote a concept <em class="emph">c</em>?
                           </li>
                           <li class="item">Which are the terms attested in a specific time interval i which
                              are synonym (antonym or hypernym or hyponym) of the term
                              <em class="emph">t</em>?
                           </li>
                           <li class="item">Which are the terms synonyms of the term <em class="emph">t</em> in a
                              specific text <em class="emph">T</em>?
                           </li>
                           <li class="item">Which are the concepts denoted by the term <em class="emph">t</em> over
                              time?
                           </li>
                           <li class="item">Which are the concepts denoted by the term t in a specific time
                              interval i?
                           </li>
                        </ul>
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p91">91</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p91">Returning to our Saussure’s case study, let us suppose, for example, that
                        scholars would like to know which terms have been used by the Genevan
                        linguist over time as synonyms of the term <span class="foreign i">signe</span> (in the
                        sense of <span class="foreign i">signe linguistique</span>, namely “l’union de l’idée avec ce produit phonatoire”).
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p92">92</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p92">The query results are represented here in the form of a graph (Figure 9), as
                        they appear in LexO, a collaborative web editor of lexical and
                        termino-ontological resources, developed by the Institute of Computational
                        Linguistics of the Italian National Research Council (ILC-CNR) and already
                        used within several research projects, such as DiTMAO [<a class="ref" href="#bellandi2018">Bellandi et al. 2018</a>] and Totus Mundus [<a class="ref" href="#piccini2018">Piccini 2018</a>].<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e1737">[26]</a></div>
                     
                     <div class="figure">
                        
                        
                        
                        <div class="caption">
                           <div class="label">Figure 9. </div>The synonyms of the term <span class="foreign i">signe</span> used by Saussure
                           between 1890 and 1911
                        </div>
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p93">93</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p93">As clearly appears in the graph, the formalization previously described makes
                        it emerge immediately Saussure’s unceasing and obsessive work in search for
                        the term that best represented the concept.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p94">94</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p94">In an initial period, spanning approximately from 1899 and 1903, Saussure
                        introduces three interesting neologisms: <span class="foreign i">signe-idée</span>,
                        <span class="foreign i">son-idée</span> and <span class="foreign i">forme-sens</span>. These
                        three nominal compounds well reflect the fact that the linguistic sign is
                        composed of two parts that are closely connected as the two sides of a piece
                        of paper. In effect, the bipartite structure of the terms mirrors the dyadic
                        nature of the linguistic sign. Each element of the compound denotes one of
                        the two parts composing the linguistic sign. More specifically, the first
                        constituent of the compound refers to the signifier, i.e. the sound-image
                        (<span class="foreign i">signe</span>, <span class="foreign i">son</span>,
                        <span class="foreign i">forme</span>), while the second element denotes the
                        conceptual side, the idea conveyed by the sign (<span class="foreign i">idée</span>,
                        <span class="foreign i">sens</span>).
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p95">95</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p95">Later, in a time span ranging from 1899 to 1903, Saussure renames
                        <span class="foreign i">signe</span> as <span class="foreign i">sème</span> and distinguishes it
                        from its “material” constituent, named
                        <span class="foreign i">sôme</span> and from its conceptual part, designated as
                        <span class="foreign i">contre- sôme</span>, thus introducing a constellation of
                        neologisms derived from ancient Greek, as is usual in scientific
                        terminology.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p96">96</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p96">All these neologisms are abandoned and no longer adopted by the Genevan
                        linguist who prefers to continue using more traditional terms such as
                        <span class="foreign i">mot</span>, <span class="foreign i">terme</span>, <span class="foreign i">signe
                           linguistique</span>. These terms are all attested in the three
                        courses of general linguistics held by Saussure in Geneva between 1909 and
                        1911. Here Saussure definitely chooses the term <span class="foreign i">signe</span> to
                        indicate the whole resulting from the association of form, named
                        <span class="foreign i">signifiant</span>, and meaning, named
                        <span class="foreign i">signifié</span>, thus resolving the ambiguity that until
                        then had characterized the term <span class="foreign i">signe</span>: “L'ambiguïté disparaîtrait si l'on désignait les trois
                        notions ici en présence par des noms qui s'appellent les uns les autres
                        tout en s'opposant. Nous proposons de conserver le mot signe pour
                        désigner le total, et de remplacer concept et image acoustique
                        respectivement par signifié et signifiant; ces derniers termes ont
                        l’avantage de marquer l’opposition qui les sépare soit entre eux, soit
                        du total dont ils font partie. [...]”
                        [<a class="ref" href="#saussure1972">Saussure 1972</a>, 99].
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p97">97</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p97">Another query focussing on the period of attestation of the term
                        <span class="foreign i">signe</span> in all its meanings brings out this ambiguity
                        more clearly, as illustrated in Figure 10.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="figure">
                        
                        
                        
                        <div class="caption">
                           <div class="label">Figure 10. </div>The attestation period of the term <span class="foreign i">signe</span> in its
                           three meanings
                        </div>
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p98">98</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p98">The green bar represents the period in which every sense is attested;
                        clicking on it the complete list of all the works where the term occurs is
                        provided.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p99">99</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p99">As clearly emerges from the graph, signe is used in the same period - and in
                        the same texts - with two different meanings, namely to indicate the most
                        “concrete” part of the linguistic sign
                        (<span class="foreign i">signe sense-2</span>) as well as to denote the union of a
                        concept and a form (<span class="foreign i">signe sense-3</span>).<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e1874">[27]</a> This polysemy
                        generates ambiguity, and – as we know – ambiguity should be strongly avoided
                        in terminology where, according to GTT, the term must be monosemic and the
                        concept unambiguous. Saussure is aware of this and therefore during his last
                        course on general linguistics – and more precisely on May 19 1911 – proposes
                        to preserve the term <span class="foreign i">signe</span> in its third sense and to
                        replace it with the neologism <span class="foreign i">signifiant</span> as for the
                        second meaning.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p100">100</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p100">As Saussure’s case study demonstrates, models and tools devoted to
                        representing and querying diachronic terminological resources play a crucial
                        role in order to better understand the terminological fluctuation and the
                        mobile and progressive conceptualisation which characterize some unstable
                        phases of science.
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">7. Conclusion and next steps</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p101">101</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p101">Representing the diachronic evolution of terminological and conceptual data in a
                     formal way constitutes a challenge, since standard formalisms adopted in the
                     Semantic Web for the representation of data have mainly been conceived for
                     static and monotonic information.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p102">102</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p102">In this work we have proposed a Semantic Web-based model for representing in an
                     explicit and formal way the diachronic evolution of concepts and terms in a
                     given domain, accompanied by a concrete use case focussing on the evolution of
                     linguistic terminology as attested in Ferdinand De Saussure’s writings.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p103">103</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p103">The next research objectives are: i) the enrichment of the model, ii) the
                     exploitation of the resource, iii) the extension of the tool LexO to support the
                     construction of diachronic resources.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e1905">[28]</a></div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p104">104</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p104">As far as the enrichment of the model is concerned, we plan to design new SWRL
                     rules for the automatic temporalization of lexico-semantic properties holding
                     between senses, such as synonymy, antonymy etc.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p105">105</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p105">In addition, in order to manage the cases when the writing period of a text is
                     uncertain, we intend to develop an algorithm exploiting the resource for
                     automatic dating suggestion: the behaviour of terms in those texts, whose
                     writing time is known, will be used to advance hypotheses on the uncertain (or
                     even unknown) writing time periods of the other texts belonging to the corpus
                     under analysis. Needless to say, the accuracy of suggested time periods will be
                     proportionate to the amount of (certain) temporal information already encoded in
                     the diachronic resource.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p106">106</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p106">A remark is in order: the temporalization approach here illustrated is domain
                     independent and can be virtually applied to any RDF data model. The main
                     drawback is that such an approach requires a significant design effort in
                     modelling and encoding specific sets of temporal rules. In addition, the
                     properties to be temporalized need to be already known at the modelling time.
                     However, in slightly “controlled” domains like terminology
                     and lexicography, our approach turns out to be effective to describe the
                     historical development of a language, and its many diatopic variations.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p107">107</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p107">Finally, we are working to extend the tool LexO as to include the management of
                     texts and temporal information. The tool will be designed to relieve scholars
                     from the time consuming (and prone to errors) task of formalising the large
                     amount of entities required to represent the temporal information according to
                     the N-ary model. In addition, thanks to LexO scholars will not be required to
                     manage the formalisms and the languages underlying the Web Semantic technologies
                     such as RDF and OWL.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p108">108</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p108">The first extension of the tool LexO aimed at the inclusion of temporal
                     information will involve the integration of functions for the management of
                     text. As discussed in Section 2, diachronic terminology is a textual
                     terminology, and terms have to be analysed in their contexts of use. For this
                     reason, LexO will be equipped with a module through which users will be able to
                     import their documents and the relative time information (writing time, date of
                     publishing, etc.), organize them into folders, browse them and link each encoded
                     term to the relative attestations in the corpus.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
               
            </div>
            
            <div id="notes">
               <h2>Notes</h2>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e242"><span class="noteRef lang en">[1] The term terminology is here to be
                     understood as the set of “lexical items belonging to
                     specialized areas of usage of one or more languages”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#sager1990">Sager 1990</a>, 2].</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e250"><span class="noteRef lang en">[2] “Clavius on the Web”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#piccini2016">Piccini 2016</a>], “Per un'edizione digitale
                     dei manoscritti di Ferdinand de Saussure”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#ruimy2013">Ruimy et al. 2013</a>], and “Totus Mundus”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#piccini2017">Piccini 2017</a>].</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e437"><span class="noteRef lang en">[3] <a href="https://www.w3.org/RDF/" onclick="window.open('https://www.w3.org/RDF/'); return false" class="ref">https://www.w3.org/RDF/</a></span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e451"><span class="noteRef lang en">[4] According
                     to Gruber (<span class="error"><a href="#gruber1993">1993: 199</a></span>), “an ontology is a specification of a conceptualization”.</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e466"><span class="noteRef lang en">[5] <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hypertext_Transfer_Protocol" onclick="window.open('https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hypertext_Transfer_Protocol'); return false" class="ref">https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hypertext_Transfer_Protocol</a></span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e478"><span class="noteRef lang en">[6] <a href="https://lemon-model.net/" onclick="window.open('https://lemon-model.net/'); return false" class="ref">https://lemon-model.net/</a>. The
                     <cite class="title italic">lemon</cite> model has been further developed into
                     the <cite class="title italic">OntoLex-lemon</cite> model by the W3C Ontolex
                     Community group. For details, see McCrae et al. (<a href="#mccrae2017">2017</a>)</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e530"><span class="noteRef lang en">[7] Please
                     refer to <a href="https://www.w3.org/2016/05/ontolex/#core" onclick="window.open('https://www.w3.org/2016/05/ontolex/#core'); return false" class="ref">https://www.w3.org/2016/05/ontolex/#core</a></span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e668"><span class="noteRef lang en">[8] <a href="https://www.w3.org/TR/swbp-n-aryRelations/" onclick="window.open('https://www.w3.org/TR/swbp-n-aryRelations/'); return false" class="ref">https://www.w3.org/TR/swbp-n-aryRelations/</a></span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e837"><span class="noteRef lang en">[9] <a href="http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-time/" onclick="window.open('http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-time/'); return false" class="ref">http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-time/</a></span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e892"><span class="noteRef lang en">[10] <a href="https://www.w3.org/Submission/SWRL/" onclick="window.open('https://www.w3.org/Submission/SWRL/'); return false" class="ref">https://www.w3.org/Submission/SWRL/</a></span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e896"><span class="noteRef lang en">[11] Rules
                     having conjunctive consequents could easily be transformed into multiple
                     rules each with an atomic consequent.</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e954"><span class="noteRef lang en">[12] For a complete built-ins list, please refer to Section 8 in
                     <a href="https://www.w3.org/Submission/SWRL/" onclick="window.open('https://www.w3.org/Submission/SWRL/'); return false" class="ref">https://www.w3.org/Submission/SWRL/</a>.</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e984"><span class="noteRef lang en">[13] <a href="https://www.w3.org/TR/swbp-n-aryRelations/" onclick="window.open('https://www.w3.org/TR/swbp-n-aryRelations/'); return false" class="ref">https://www.w3.org/TR/swbp-n-aryRelations/</a></span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e996"><span class="noteRef lang en">[14] The
                     plug-in for Protégé CHRONOS, devoted to creating and editing temporal
                     ontologies in OWL, is based on this model.</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e1014"><span class="noteRef lang en">[15] <a href="http://purl.org/dc/dcmitype/Event" onclick="window.open('http://purl.org/dc/dcmitype/Event'); return false" class="ref">http://purl.org/dc/dcmitype/Event</a></span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e1033"><span class="noteRef lang en">[16] <a href="https://www.w3.org/TR/owl-time/#time:ProperInterval" onclick="window.open('https://www.w3.org/TR/owl-time/#time:ProperInterval'); return false" class="ref">https://www.w3.org/TR/owl-time/#time:ProperInterval</a></span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e1047"><span class="noteRef lang en">[17] <a href="http://purl.org/dc/terms/date" onclick="window.open('http://purl.org/dc/terms/date'); return false" class="ref">http://purl.org/dc/terms/date</a></span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e1070"><span class="noteRef lang en">[18] Please refer to <a href="https://www.lexinfo.net/" onclick="window.open('https://www.lexinfo.net/'); return false" class="ref">https://www.lexinfo.net/</a></span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e1075"><span class="noteRef lang en">[19] In this paper, we
                     considered exclusively these properties as they are directly defined in
                     ontolex. However, other lexico-semantic properties can be taken into account
                     as well, for example translation defined in Lexinfo vocabulary (see <a href="https://lexinfo.net/" onclick="window.open('https://lexinfo.net/'); return false" class="ref">https://lexinfo.net/</a>).</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e1219"><span class="noteRef lang en">[20] <a href="http://purl.org/dc/dcmitype/Text" onclick="window.open('http://purl.org/dc/dcmitype/Text'); return false" class="ref">http://purl.org/dc/dcmitype/Text</a></span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e1244"><span class="noteRef lang en">[21] <a href="http://lawd.info/ontology/hasAttestation" onclick="window.open('http://lawd.info/ontology/hasAttestation'); return false" class="ref">http://lawd.info/ontology/hasAttestation</a></span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e1277"><span class="noteRef lang en">[22] It is important to underline that every relation defined
                     by the scholar is - by default - considered valid for the entire time
                     interval of the reference corpus.</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e1282"><span class="noteRef lang en">[23] <a href="http://purl.org/dc/terms/issued" onclick="window.open('http://purl.org/dc/terms/issued'); return false" class="ref">http://purl.org/dc/terms/issued</a></span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e1345"><span class="noteRef lang en">[24] <a href="https://github.com/protegeproject/swrlapi/wiki/ExtensionsBuiltInLibrary" onclick="window.open('https://github.com/protegeproject/swrlapi/wiki/ExtensionsBuiltInLibrary'); return false" class="ref">https://github.com/protegeproject/swrlapi/wiki/ExtensionsBuiltInLibrary</a></span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e1568"><span class="noteRef lang en">[25] See Saussure’s
                     letter to Gaston Paris (30 December 1891). On the date of this
                     manuscript, see Gambarara (<a href="#gambarara2009">2009</a>).</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e1737"><span class="noteRef lang en">[26] For the time being, LexO supports the uploading of diachronic
                     resources, which are built according to the N-ary model, and offers a
                     <cite class="title italic">Question Answering</cite> system, implemented
                     as a user-friendly interface composed of several controlled natural
                     language templates. Each template makes it possible to formulate a query
                     in controlled natural language thanks to dropdown menus. For further
                     extensions of the tool LexO, see Section 7.</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e1874"><span class="noteRef lang en">[27] <span class="foreign i">Signe
                        sense-1</span> refers to any material entity to which we
                     associate a sense. This meaning is not taken into account here, as not
                     relevant for the purposes of this discussion.</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e1905"><span class="noteRef lang en">[28] The most recent stable version of
                     LexO is available at <a href="https://github.com/GitHubAndre/LexO-lite" onclick="window.open('https://github.com/GitHubAndre/LexO-lite'); return false" class="ref">https://github.com/GitHubAndre/LexO-lite</a>.</span></div>
            </div>
            <div id="worksCited">
               <h2>Works Cited</h2>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="allen1983">
                     <!-- close -->Allen 1983</span> Allen, J. (1983). “Maintaing knowledge about temporal intervals”. <cite class="title italic">Communications of the ACM</cite>, 26(11), pp. 832–843.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="artale2000">
                     <!-- close -->Artale and Franconi 2000</span> Artale, A. and Franconi,
                  E. (2000). “A survey of temporal extensions of description
                  logics”. <cite class="title italic">Annals of Mathematics and Artificial
                     Intelligence</cite>, 30 (1-4), pp. 171-210.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="arauz2012">
                     <!-- close -->Aráuz et al. 2012</span> Aráuz L., Faber, P. and Montero
                  Martínez, S. (2012). “Specialized Language
                  Semantics”. In: P. Faber, ed., <cite class="title italic">A cognitive
                     linguistics view of terminology and specialized language</cite>, Series:
                  Applications of Cognitive Linguistics [ACL] 20, 1st ed. Berlin, Boston: De
                  Gruyter Mouton, pp. 95-175.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="baader2001">
                     <!-- close -->Baader and Sattler 2001</span> Baader, F. and Sattler U.
                  (2001). “An overview of tableau algorithms for description
                  logics”. <cite class="title italic">Studia Logica</cite>, 69 (1), pp.
                  5-40.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="baader2003">
                     <!-- close -->Baader et al. 2003</span> Baader, F., Calvanese, D.,
                  McGuinness, D., Patel-Schneider, P., Nardi, D. (2003). “The
                  description logic handbook: Theory, implementation and applications”.
                  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="batsakis2017">
                     <!-- close -->Batsakis et al. 2017</span> Batsakis, S., Petrakis E.,
                  Tachmazidis, I. and Antoniou, G. (2017). “Temporal
                  representation and reasoning in OWL 2”. <cite class="title italic">Semantic
                     Web</cite>, 8 (6), pp. 981-1000.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="bellandi2017a">
                     <!-- close -->Bellandi et al. 2017a</span> Bellandi, A., Boschetti,
                  F., Khan, F., Del Grosso, A.M. and Monachini, M. (2017). “Provando e riprovando modelli di dizionario storico digitale: Collegare
                  voci, citazioni, interpretazioni”. <cite class="title italic">Proceedings
                     of the AIUCD</cite>, pp. 119–125.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="bellandi2017b">
                     <!-- close -->Bellandi et al. 2017b</span> Bellandi, A.,
                  Giovannetti, E., Piccini, S., Weingart, A. (2017). Developing LexO: A
                  Collaborative Editor of Multilingual Lexica and Termino-ontological Resources in
                  the Humanities. In F. Frontini, L. Grčić Simeunović, Š. Vintar, F. Khan, A.,
                  Parvisieds., eds., <cite class="title italic">Proceedings of Language, Ontology,
                     Terminology and Knowledge Structures Workshop</cite> (LOTKS 2017), pp.
                  86-95.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="bellandi2018">
                     <!-- close -->Bellandi et al. 2018</span> Bellandi, A., Giovannetti,
                  E., Weingart, A. (2018). “Multilingual and Multiword
                  Phenomena in a lemon Old Occitan Medico-Botanical Lexicon”. <cite class="title italic">Information</cite> 9 (3), 52.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="benveniste1964">
                     <!-- close -->Benveniste 1964</span> Benveniste, E. (1964). “Lettres de F. de Saussure à A. Meillet”. <cite class="title italic">Cahiers Ferdinand de Saussure</cite>, 21, pp. 89-130.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="bernerslee2001">
                     <!-- close -->Berners-Lee et al. 2001</span> Berners-Lee, T.,
                  Hendler, J., Lassila, O. (2001). “The semantic web”.
                  <cite class="title italic">Scientific American</cite>, 284(5), pp. 34-43.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="bizer2011">
                     <!-- close -->Bizer et al. 2011</span> Bizer, Ch., Heath, T.,
                  Berners-Lee, T. (2011). “Linked data: The story so
                  far”. In Amit Sheth, ed., <cite class="title italic">Semantic services,
                     interoperability and web applications: emerging concepts</cite>, 1st ed.,
                  Hershey, Pennsylvania: IGI Global, pp. 205-227.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="bourigault1999">
                     <!-- close -->Bourigault and Slodzian 1999</span> Bourigault D.,
                  Slodzian M. (1999). “Pour une terminologie
                  textuelle”. <cite class="title italic">Terminologies nouvelles</cite> 19, pp.
                  29-32.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="buitelaar2010">
                     <!-- close -->Buitelaar 2010</span> Buitelaar, P. (2010). “Ontology-based Semantic Lexicons: Mapping between Terms and
                  Object Descriptions”, In C. Huang, N. Calzolari, A. Gangemi, A.
                  Lenci, A. Oltramari, &amp; L. Prevot, eds., <cite class="title italic">Ontology and
                     the Lexicon: A Natural Language Processing Perspective. Studies in Natural
                     Language Processing</cite>. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp.
                  212-223.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="cabre1999">
                     <!-- close -->Cabré 1999</span> Cabré, M. T. (1999). <cite class="title italic">Terminology: Theory, Methods and Applications</cite>.
                  Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="calvanese2001">
                     <!-- close -->Calvanese et al. 2001</span> Calvanese, D., De
                  Giacomo,G., Lenzerini, M. Nardi, D. (2001). “Reasoning in
                  Expressive Description Logics”. <cite class="title italic">Handbook of
                     automated reasoning</cite> 2, pp. 1581-1634.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="carlyle2011">
                     <!-- close -->Carlyle 2011</span> Carlyle, A. (2011). “Understanding FRBR as a conceptual model”. <cite class="title italic">Library Resources &amp; Technical Services</cite>, 50 (4),
                  pp. 264-273.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="cimiano2011">
                     <!-- close -->Cimiano et al. 2011</span> Cimiano, P., Buitelaar, P.,
                  McCrae, J., Sintek, M. (2011). “Lexinfo: A declarative model
                  for the lexicon-ontology interface”. <cite class="title italic">Web
                     Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web</cite> 9 (1),
                  pp. 29-51.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="cimiano2015">
                     <!-- close -->Cimiano et al. 2015</span> Cimiano, P., McCrae, J.P.,
                  Rodríguez-Doncel, V., Gornostay, T., Gómez-Pérez, A., Siemoneit, B., Lagzdins,
                  A. (2015). “Linked terminology: applying linked data
                  principles to terminological resources”. In Kosem, I., Jakubíček, M.,
                  Kallas, J., Krek, S., eds., <cite class="title italic">Electronic lexicography in the
                     21st century: linking lexical data in the digital age. Proceedings of the
                     eLex 2015 conference</cite>, 11-13 August 2015, Herstmonceux Castle, United
                  Kingdom. Ljubljana/Brighton: Trojina, Institute for Applied Slovene
                  Studies/Lexical Computing Ltd, , Sussex, UK, pp. 504-517.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="cosenza2016">
                     <!-- close -->Cosenza 2016</span> Cosenza, G. (2016). <cite class="title italic">Dalle parole ai termini. I percorsi di pensiero di F. de
                     Saussure</cite>. Alessandria. Edizioni dell’Orso. Collezione “Studi e Ricerche”.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="dechandon2019">
                     <!-- close -->Dechandon et al. 2019</span> Dechandon, D., Gerencsér,
                  A., Ruiz, M.R. (2019). “Terminology: Towards a Systematic
                  Integration of Semantics and Metadata”. In <cite class="title italic">Translating and the Computer</cite> 41, Proceedings of AsLing (The
                  International Association for Advancement in Language Technology), Geneva:
                  Editions Tradulex.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="delgratta2015">
                     <!-- close -->Del Gratta et al. 2015</span> Del Gratta, R.,
                  Frontini, F., Khan, F., Monachini, M. (2015). “Converting
                  the PAROLE SIMPLE CLIPS Lexicon into RDF with lemon”. <cite class="title italic">Semantic Web</cite>, 6 (4), pp. 387-392.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="dury2004">
                     <!-- close -->Dury 2004</span> Dury, P. (2004). “Building a Bilingual Diachronic Corpus of Ecology: The Long Road to
                  Completion”. <cite class="title italic">Icame Journal</cite>, 28, pp.
                  5-16.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="dury2008">
                     <!-- close -->Dury 2008</span> Dury, P. (2008). “The
                  rise of carbon neutral and compensation carbone: A diachronic investigation
                  into the migration of vocabulary from the language of ecology to newspaper
                  language and vice versa”. <cite class="title italic">Terminology</cite>,
                  14(2), pp. 230-248.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="dury2009">
                     <!-- close -->Dury and Picton 2009</span> Dury, P, Picton, A. (2009).
                  “Terminologie et diachronie: vers une réconciliation
                  théorique et méthodologique?”. <cite class="title italic">Revue française
                     de linguistique appliquée</cite>, 14 (2), pp. 31-41.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="ecklekohler2015">
                     <!-- close -->Eckle-Kohler 2015</span> Eckle-Kohler, J., McCrae,
                  J.P., Chiarcos, Ch. (2015). “LemonUby–A large, interlinked,
                  syntactically-rich lexical resource for ontologies”. <cite class="title italic">Semantic Web</cite>, 6 (4), pp. 371-378.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="ehrmann2014">
                     <!-- close -->Ehrmann et al. 2014</span> Ehrmann, M., Cecconi, F.,
                  Vannella, D., Mccrae, J.P., Cimiano, P., Navigli, R. (2014). “Representing Multilingual Data as Linked Data: the Case of
                  BabelNet 2.0”. In N. Calzolari, K. Choukri, T. Declerck, H. Loftsson,
                  B. Maegaard, J. Mariani, A. Moreno, J. Odijk, S. Piperidis, eds., <cite class="title italic">Proceedings of LREC 2014</cite>, pp. 401–408.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="engler1968">
                     <!-- close -->Engler 1968</span> Engler, R. (1968). <cite class="title italic">Lexique de la terminologie saussurienne</cite>.
                  Utrecht-Anvers: Spectrum. Comité international permanent des linguistes.
                  Publication de la commission de terminologie.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="fenoglio2012">
                     <!-- close -->Fenoglio 2012</span> Fenoglio, I. (2012). “Genèse du geste linguistique : une complexité
                  heuristique”. <cite class="title italic">Genesis</cite> [En ligne], 35,
                  pp. 13-40. DOI : 10.4000/genesis.1033.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="flouris2008">
                     <!-- close -->Flouris et al. 2008</span> Flouris, G., Manakanatas D.,
                  Kondylakis H., Plexousakis D., Antoniou G. (2008). “Ontology
                  Change: Classification and Survey”. <cite class="title italic">The
                     Knowledge Engineering Review</cite>, 23, pp. 117–52.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="francopoulo2006">
                     <!-- close -->Francopoulo et al. 2006</span> Francopoulo, G.,
                  George, M., Calzolari, N., Monachini, M., Bel, N., Pet, M., Soria, C. (2006).
                  “Lexical markup framework (LMF)”. <cite class="title italic">Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Language
                     Resources and Evaluation</cite> LREC 2006, Genova, pp. 233-236.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="gambarara2009">
                     <!-- close -->Gambarara 2009</span> Gambarara, D. (2009).
                  Présentation de section II “Système et cognition. Quaternion
                  et parallélie dans De l’Essence double du langage”. <cite class="title italic">Cahiers Ferdinand de Saussure</cite>, 61, pp. 75-86.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="godel1957">
                     <!-- close -->Godel 1957</span> Godel, R. (1957). <cite class="title italic">Les sources manuscrites du Cours de linguistique générale de Ferdinand de
                     Saussure</cite>. Genève: Droz.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="grandi2009">
                     <!-- close -->Grandi 2009</span> Grandi, F. (2009). “Multi-temporal RDF ontology versioning”. In M. d'Aquin,
                  G. Antoniou, eds., <cite class="title italic">Proceedings of the 3rd International
                     Workshop on Ontology Dynamics</cite> (IWOD-09), collocated with the 8th
                  International Semantic Web Conference (ISWC-2009), Washington DC, USA, October
                  26, 2009.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="gruber1991">
                     <!-- close -->Gruber 1991</span> Gruber, T. R. (1991). “A translation approach to portable ontologies”. <cite class="title italic">Knowledge Acquisition</cite>, vol. V (2), pp. 199-220.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="kanmani2016">
                     <!-- close -->Kanmani 2016</span> Kanmani, A. Clara, T. Chockalingam,
                  and N. Guruprasad. (2016). “RDF data model and its multi
                  reification approaches: A comprehensive comparative analysis”. In
                  <cite class="title italic">Inventive Computation Technologies (ICICT),
                     International Conference on</cite>, vol. 1, pp. 1-5. IEEE.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="khan2014">
                     <!-- close -->Khan et al. 2014</span> Khan, F., Boschetti, F., Frontini,
                  F. (2014). “Using lemon to model lexical semantic shift in
                  diachronic lexical resources”. In Ch. Chiarcos, J. Ph. McCrae, P.
                  Osenova, C. Vertan, eds., <cite class="title italic">3rd. Workshop on Linked Data in
                     Linguistics: Multilingual Knowledge Resources and Natural Language
                     Processing</cite>, p. 50.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="khan2016">
                     <!-- close -->Khan et al. 2016</span> Khan, F., Bellandi, A., Monachini,
                  M. (2016). “Tools and Instruments for Building and Querying
                  Diachronic Computational Lexica”. In <cite class="title italic">Proceedings
                     of the Workshop on Language Technology Resources and Tools for Digital
                     Humanities</cite> (LT4DH), Osaka, Japan: The COLING 2016 Organizing
                  Committee, pp. 164-171.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="khan2017">
                     <!-- close -->Khan et al. 2017</span> Khan, F., Bowers, J., Frontini, F.
                  (2017). “Situating Word Senses in their Historical Context
                  with Linked Data”. In C. Gardent, Ch. Retoré, eds., <cite class="title italic">IWCS 2017 — 12th International Conference on Computational
                     Semantics — Short papers</cite>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="klein2001">
                     <!-- close -->Klein and Fensel 2001</span> Klein, M. CA., Fensel, D.
                  (2001). “Ontology versioning on the Semantic Web”.
                  <cite class="title italic">Proceedings of the First International Conference on
                     Semantic Web Working</cite>. California: CEUR-WS.org, pp. 75-91.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="kripke1995">
                     <!-- close -->Kripke 1995</span> Kripke, S. (1995). <cite class="title italic">La logique des noms propres</cite>. Paris: Les Editions de
                  Minuit.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="kristiansen2014">
                     <!-- close -->Kristiansen 2014</span> Kristiansen M. (2014).
                  “Concept change, term dynamics and culture-boundness in
                  economic-administrative domains”. In R. Temmermann and M. van
                  Campenhoudt, eds., <cite class="title italic">Dynamics and terminology: an
                     interdisciplinary perspective on monolingual and multilingual culture-bound
                     communication</cite>. Terminology and lexicography research and practice,
                  volume 16, Amsterdam; Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing Company, pp.
                  235-256.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="kroeger2013">
                     <!-- close -->Kroeger 2013</span> Kroeger, A. (2013). “The road to BIBFRAME: the evolution of the idea of
                  bibliographic transition into a post-MARC Future”. <cite class="title italic">Cataloging &amp; classification quarterly</cite>, 51 (8), pp.
                  873-890.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="kuhn1970">
                     <!-- close -->Kuhn 1970</span> Kuhn, T.S. (1970). <cite class="title italic">The structure of scientific revolutions</cite>. 2nd ed., Chicago: The
                  University of Chicago Press.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="lacy2005">
                     <!-- close -->Lacy 2005</span> Lacy, L.W. (2005). <cite class="title italic">Owl: Representing Information Using the Web Ontology Language</cite>.
                  Victoria, BC, Canada: Trafford Publishing.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="lenci2000">
                     <!-- close -->Lenci et al. 2000</span> Lenci, A., Bel, N., Busa, F.,
                  Calzolari, N., Gola, E., Monachini, M., Ogonowski, A., Peters, I., Peters, W.,
                  Ruimy, N., Villegas, M., Zampolli, A. (2000). “SIMPLE: A
                  General Framework for the development of Multilingual Lexicons”.
                  <cite class="title italic">International Journal of Lexicography</cite>, 13 (4).
                  Special issue “Dictionaries, Thesauri and Lexical-Semantic Relations”, pp.
                  249-263.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="lutz2008">
                     <!-- close -->Lutz et al. 2008</span> Lutz, C., Wolter, F.,
                  Zakharyaschev, M. (2008). “Temporal Description Logics: A
                  Survey”. <cite class="title italic">TIME</cite>, pp. 3-14.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="makri2011">
                     <!-- close -->Makri 2011</span> Makri, P. (2011). 4D-Fluents Plug-In: A
                  Tool for Handling Temporal Ontologies in Protégé. <cite class="title italic">Diss.
                     Diploma Thesis</cite>. Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering,
                  Technical University of Crete.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="mccrae2014">
                     <!-- close -->McCrae et al. 2014</span> McCrae, J.P., Fellbaum, C.,
                  Cimiano, P. (2014). “Publishing and linking WordNet using
                  lemon and RDF”. <cite class="title italic">Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop
                     on Linked Data in Linguistics</cite>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="mccrae2017">
                     <!-- close -->McCrae et al. 2017</span> McCrae, J. P., Bosque-Gil, J.,
                  Gracia, J., Buitelaar, P., &amp; Cimiano, P. “The
                  OntoLexLemon Model: Development and Applications”. In I. Kosem, C.
                  Tiberius, M. Jakubíček, J. Kallas, S. Krek, V. Baisa, eds, <cite class="title italic">Electronic lexicography in the 21st century. Proceedings of eLex 2017
                     conference</cite>, September 19-21, Leiden, Netherlands. Lexical Computing
                  CZ s.R.O, Brno, Czech Republic, pp. 19-21.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="montiel2008">
                     <!-- close -->Montiel-Ponsoda 2008</span> Montiel-Ponsoda, E., Aguado
                  de Cea, G., Gómez-Pérez, A., Peters, W. (2008). “Modelling
                  multilinguality in ontologies”. <cite class="title italic">Proceedings of
                     the 21st International Conference on Computational Linguistics
                     (COLING)</cite>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="moller1998">
                     <!-- close -->Møller 1998</span> Møller, B. (1998). A la recherche
                  d’une terminochronie. <cite class="title italic">Meta</cite>, XLIII-3, pp.
                  1-13
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="pearson1998">
                     <!-- close -->Pearson 1998</span> Pearson, J. (1998). <cite class="title italic">Terms in Context, Studies in Corpus Linguistic</cite>. Vol.
                  I, 1 ed., Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="piccini2016">
                     <!-- close -->Piccini 2016</span> Piccini, S. (2016). “CLAVIUS: verso la modellazione di una risorsa
                  termino-ontologica diacronica del dominio matematico-astronomico del XVII
                  secolo. Atti del XXVI Convegno internazionale Ass.I.Term”
                  “Terminologia e organizzazione della conoscenza nella
                  conservazione della memoria digitale”. 14 – 16 April 2016. Rende
                  (Italy).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="piccini2017">
                     <!-- close -->Piccini 2017</span> Piccini, S., Corsi, E., Giovannetti,
                  E. (2017). “Une ressource termino-ontologique bilingue
                  chinois-italien: le cas de la traduction de la Mappemonde de Matteo Ricci
                  par Pasquale D’Elia”. <cite class="title italic">Proceedings of the
                     Conference TOTh 2017 Terminology &amp; Ontology: Theories and
                     applications</cite>, 8-9 June 2017, University of Savoie, Chambéry,
                  France.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="piccini2018">
                     <!-- close -->Piccini 2018</span> Piccini, S., Bellandi, A.,
                  Giovannetti, E. (2018). “A Semantic Web Approach to
                  Modelling and Building a Bilingual Chinese-Italian Termino-ontological
                  Resource”. In A. Čibej, V. Gorjanc, I. Kosem, S. Krek, eds., <cite class="title italic">The XVIII EURALEX International Congress: Lexicography in
                     Global Contexts Book of Abstracts</cite>, 17-21 July 2018, Ljubljana,
                  Slovenia, pp. 87-90.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="picton2009">
                     <!-- close -->Picton 2009</span> Picton, A. (2009). <cite class="title italic">Diachronie en langue de spécialité. Définition d'une méthode
                     linguistique outillée pour repérer l'évolution des connaissances en corpus.
                     Un exemple appliqué au domaine spatial</cite>. PhD. Dissertation. Toulouse
                  2.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="preventis2014">
                     <!-- close -->Preventis et al. 2014</span> Preventis, A., Petrakis,
                  E., Batsakis, S. (2014). “Chronos Ed: A tool for handling
                  temporal ontologies in Protégé”. <cite class="title italic">International
                     Journal on Artificial Intelligence Tools</cite>, 23 (4).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="pustejovsky1995">
                     <!-- close -->Pustejovsky 1995</span> Pustejovsky, J. (1995).
                  <cite class="title italic">The Generative Lexicon</cite>, 1st ed. Cambridge MA:
                  The MIT Press.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="rouces2017">
                     <!-- close -->Rouces et al. 2017</span> Rouces, J., de Melo, G., Hose,
                  K. (2017). “FrameBase: Enabling integration of heterogeneous
                  knowledge”. <cite class="title italic">Semantic Web</cite>, 8(6), pp.
                  817-850.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="ruimy2013">
                     <!-- close -->Ruimy et al. 2013</span> Ruimy, N., Piccini, S.,
                  Giovannetti, E., Bellandi, A. (2013). “Lessicografia
                  Computazionale e Terminologia Saussuriana”. In D. Gambarara, M.P.
                  Marchese, eds., <cite class="title italic">Guida per un'edizione digitale dei
                     manoscritti di Ferdinand de Saussure</cite>, Alessandria: Edizioni
                  dell'Orso.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="sager1990">
                     <!-- close -->Sager 1990</span> Sager J. (1990). <cite class="title italic">A
                     Practical Course in Terminology Processing</cite>, Amsterdam: John
                  Benjamins Publishing.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="salvadores2013">
                     <!-- close -->Salvadores et al. 2013</span> Salvadores, M.,
                  Alexander, P.R., Musen, M.A., Noy, N.F. (2013). “Bioportal
                  as a dataset of linked biomedical ontologies and terminologies in
                  RDF”. <cite class="title italic">Semantic Web Journal</cite>, 4(3), pp.
                  277–284.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="sansone2007">
                     <!-- close -->Sansone 2007</span> Sansone, SA., Scheuermann, RH.,
                  Shah, N., Whetzel, PL., Lewis, S. (2007). “The OBO Foundry:
                  coordinated evolution of ontologies to support biomedical data
                  integration”. <cite class="title italic">Nature biotechnology</cite>,
                  25(11), 2007:1251.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="saussure1972">
                     <!-- close -->Saussure 1972</span> Saussure de, F. (1972). <cite class="title italic">Cours de linguistique générale</cite>. Edition critique
                  préparée par Tullio De Mauro, Paris: Payot.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="slodzian2000">
                     <!-- close -->Slodzian 2000</span> Slodzian M. (2000). “L'émergence d'une terminologie textuelle et le retour du
                  sens”. In H. Béjoint and Ph. Thoiron, eds., <cite class="title italic">Le
                     sens en terminologie</cite>, Lyon: Presse universitaire de Lyon, pp.
                  61-85.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="smith2007">
                     <!-- close -->Smith et al. 2007</span> Smith, B., Ashburner, M., Rosse,
                  C., Bard, J., Bug, W., Ceusters, W., Goldberg, LJ., Eilbeck, K., Ireland, A.,
                  Mungall, CJ.; OBI Consortium, Leontis, N., Rocca-Serra, P., Ruttenberg, (2007)
                  “The OBO Foundry: coordinated evolution of ontologies to
                  support biomedical data integration”. <cite class="title italic">Nature
                     Biotechnology</cite>, 25, pp. 1251–1255.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="stetter1979">
                     <!-- close -->Stetter 1979</span> Stetter, C. (1979). “La fonction des réflexions sémiologiques dans la fondation de
                  la linguistique générale chez F. de Saussure”. <cite class="title italic">Kodikas-Code</cite>, Gunter Narr Verlag, Tübingen, vol. 1, n° l, p.
                  12.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="sanchezo2014">
                     <!-- close -->Sánchez Ibáñez 2014</span> Sánchez Ibáñez, M., García
                  Palacios, J. (2014). “Semantic characterization of terms as
                  a trace of terminological dependency”, in Terminology. <cite class="title italic">International Journal of Theoretical and Applied Issues in
                     Specialized Communication</cite>, 20 (2), pp. 171 - 197.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="sanchezrada2014">
                     <!-- close -->Sánchez-Rada et al. 2014</span> Sánchez-Rada, J. F.,
                  Vulcu,G., Iglesias C. A., and Buitelaar, P. (2014). “EUROSENTIMENT: Linked data sentiment analysis”. In Matthew Horridge;
                  M. Rospocher, J. van Ossenbruggen, eds., <cite class="title italic">Proceedings of the
                     ISWC 2014 Posters &amp; Demonstrations Track, a track within the 13th
                     International Semantic Web Conference</cite> (ISWC 2014), pp.
                  145-148.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="serasset2015">
                     <!-- close -->Sérasset 2015</span> Sérasset, G. (2015). “DBnary: Wiktionary as a Lemon-based multilingual lexical
                  resource in RDF”. <cite class="title italic">Semantic Web</cite>, 6 (4),
                  pp. 355-361.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="tappolet2009">
                     <!-- close -->Tappolet and Bernstein 2009</span> Tappolet, J.,
                  Bernstein, A. (2009). “Applied temporal RDF: Efficient
                  temporal querying of RDF data with SPARQL”. <cite class="title italic">European Semantic Web Conference</cite>, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp.
                  308-322.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="vancampenhoudt1997">
                     <!-- close -->Van Campenhoudt 1997</span> Van Campenhoudt, M.
                  (1997). “Maille ou maillon : quand des terminographes
                  négligent l’évolution de l’usage”. In A. Clas, S. Mejri, T.
                  Baccouche, eds., <cite class="title italic">Proceedings of the 5th scientific days
                     Réseau: Lexicologie, Terminologie, Traduction</cite> (Agence Universitaire
                  de la Francophonie), La mémoire des mots, Tunis, Tunisia,251-272.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="welty2006">
                     <!-- close -->Welty et al. 2006</span> Welty, Ch., Fikes, R., Makarios,
                  S. (2006). “A reusable ontology for fluents in OWL”.
                  <cite class="title italic">FOIS</cite>, vol. 150, pp. 226-236.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="wilkinson2016">
                     <!-- close -->Wilkinson et al. 2016</span> Wilkinson, M.D.,
                  Dumontier, M., Aalbersberg, I.J., Appleton, G., Axton, M., Baak, A., Blomberg N.
                  et al. (2016). “The FAIR Guiding Principles for scientific
                  data management and stewardship”. <cite class="title italic">Scientific
                     data</cite> 3.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="wuster1968">
                     <!-- close -->Wüster 1968</span> Wüster, E. (1968). <cite class="title italic">The Machine Tool. An Interlingual dictionary of basic
                     concepts</cite>. 1 ed., London: Technical Press.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="zanola2014">
                     <!-- close -->Zanola 2014</span> Zanola, M. T. (2014). <cite class="title italic">Arts et métiers au XVIIIe siècle. Essais de terminologie
                     diachronique</cite>. Paris: L’Harmattan.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="zekri2017">
                     <!-- close -->Zekri et al. 2017</span> Zekri A., Brahmia, Z., Grandi,
                  F., Bouaziz, R. (2017). “Temporal schema versioning in τOWL:
                  a systematic approach for the management of time-varying knowledge”.
                  <cite class="title italic">Journal of Decision Systems</cite>, 26 (2), pp.
                  113-137.
               </div>
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar"><a href="#">Preview</a>  |  <span style="color: grey">XML</span> |  <a href="#" onclick="javascript:window.print();" title="Click for print friendly version">Print Article</a></div>
         </div>
      </div>
   </body>
</html>