<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
      <title>[PREVIEW] DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly: </title>
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_screen.css" media="screen" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_print.css" media="print" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" /><style type="text/css">
        #mainContent {
          float: none;
          padding-top: 2em;
          padding-left: 4em;
          padding-right: 4em;
          margin-left: 225px;
           
        }</style></head>
   <body>
      <div id="mainContent">
         <div xmlns:dhqBiblio="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/ns/biblio" class="DHQarticle">
            <div id="pubInfo">Preview<br />Volume  Number 
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar">
               <form id="taporware" action="get">
                  <div><a href="/dhq/preview/index.html">Preview</a>
                      | 
                     <a rel="external" href="/dhq/vol/// 000213 .xml">XML</a>
                     
                     | 
                     		   Discuss
                     			(<a href="/dhq/vol/// 000213 / 000213 .html#disqus_thread" data-disqus-identifier=" 000213 ">
                        				Comments
                        			</a>)
                     
                  </div>
               </form>
            </div>
            
            <div class="DHQheader">
               
               
               
               
               <h1 class="articleTitle">The Arrival Fallacy: Collaborative Research Relationships in the
                  Digital Humanities
               </h1>
               
               <div class="author"><span style="color: grey">Alix Keener</span> &lt;<a href="mailto:alix_dot_keener_at_gmail_dot_com" onclick="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('alix_dot_keener_at_gmail_dot_com'); return false;" onkeypress="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('alix_dot_keener_at_gmail_dot_com'); return false;">alix_dot_keener_at_gmail_dot_com</a>&gt;, University of Michigan
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               <span class="Z3988" title="url_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;rft_val_fmt=info%3Aofi%2Ffmt%3Akev%3Amtx%3Ajournal&amp;rfr_id=info%3Asid%2Fzotero.org%3A2&amp;rft.genre=article&amp;rft.atitle=The%20Arrival%20Fallacy%3A%20Collaborative%20Research%20Relationships%20in%20the%20Digital%20Humanities&amp;rft.jtitle=Digital%20Humanities%20Quarterly&amp;rft.stitle=DHQ&amp;rft.issn=1938-4122&amp;rft.date=&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.aulast=Keener&amp;rft.aufirst=Alix&amp;rft.au=Alix%20Keener"> </span></div>
            
            
            <div id="DHQtext">
               
               
               <div id="abstract">
                  <h2>Abstract</h2>
                  
                  <p>As discussion and debates on the digital humanities continue among scholars, so too
                     does discussion about how academic libraries can and should support this scholarship.
                     Through interviews with digital humanities scholars and academic librarians within
                     the Center for Institutional Cooperation, this study aims to explore some points of
                     common perspective and underlying tensions in research relationships. Qualitative
                     interviews revealed that, while both groups are enthusiastic about the future of
                     faculty-librarian collaboration on digital scholarship, there remain certain tensions
                     about the role of the library and the librarian. Scholars appreciate the specialized
                     expertise of librarians, especially in metadata and special collections, but they
                     can
                     take a more active stance in utilizing current library resources or vocalizing their
                     needs for other resources. This expertise and these services can be leveraged to make
                     the library an active and equal partner in research. Additionally, libraries should
                     address internal issues, such as training and re-skilling librarians as necessary;
                     better-coordinated outreach to academic departments is also needed. 
                  </p>
                  
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Introduction</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p1">1</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p1">In February 2014, the Online Computer Library Center (OCLC) published a report titled
                     <cite class="title italic">Does Every Research Library Need a Digital Humanities
                        Center?</cite>
                     [<a class="ref" href="#schaffner2014">Schaffner and Erway 2014</a>], meant to guide library deans and directors in
                     deciding whether or not to "sink resources" into a digital humanities center.
                     The report immediately generated intense discussion and even backlash and controversy
                     among bloggers and users of Twitter (consisting mostly of academic librarians or
                     academic staff). Criticisms of the report included that it strips agency from
                     librarians, assumes incorrectly that digital humanities scholars always know for what
                     they are looking, and misses the insight that sometimes librarians are actually the
                     digital humanists.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e172">[1]</a> Other than a
                     broad example of the current landscape of digital humanities debates, the OCLC report
                     serves as an example of the tensions underlying collaborative research relationships
                     between faculty and librarians (or other academic staff, including postdoctoral
                     researchers or support staff).
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p2">2</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p2">Digital humanities (DH), as a field, has an increasing presence in institutions of
                     higher education [<a class="ref" href="#kirschenbaum2010">Kirschenbaum 2010</a>]. However, while its presence has
                     grown, so have questions about the kind of infrastructure that is needed to support
                     research in the digital humanities. In the last several years that presence has
                     increasingly been in academic libraries. Whether it is a center, such as the
                     University of Nebraska-Lincoln’s Center for Digital Research in the Humanities, or
                     smaller, more ambiguous spaces staffed with DH-knowledgeable librarians, academic
                     libraries are becoming inextricably linked with digital humanities research on their
                     respective campuses. That means that new collaborative relationships are emerging
                     between individuals on those campuses. However, the nature of these relationships
                     may
                     produce tension, as the nature of being an equal collaborator may not fit into the
                     role of "traditional" librarianship [<a class="ref" href="#vandegrift2013">Vandegrift and Varner 2013</a>].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p3">3</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p3">New digital technologies are changing the way humanist scholars do research and the
                     way they communicate their findings through the publication of their work [<a class="ref" href="#burgess2011">Burgess and Hamming 2011</a>]. Academic libraries are also adapting to these new modes
                     of research: no longer are librarians simply supporting research endeavors through
                     reference and instruction services; they are partners in research collaborations [<a class="ref" href="#vandegrift2013">Vandegrift and Varner 2013</a>]. The findings of a survey included in the Association
                     of Research Libraries (ARL) Spec Kit 326 demonstrate that libraries need to be
                     familiar with the types of research being pursued at their institution. What kind
                     of
                     expertise is needed: that of an equal partner in collaboration, or an on-call service
                     provider? The research reported in this article builds on the ARL investigation to
                     analyze research relationships among scholars and librarians at CIC universities.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Context</h1>
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Definitions</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p4">4</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p4">For the purposes of developing the <span class="hi bold"><span class="hi superscript">interview</span></span> protocols, this study adopts Kathleen
                     Fitzpatrick’s (2010) definition of digital humanities as "a nexus
                     of fields within which scholars use computing technologies to investigate the
                     kinds of questions that are traditional to the humanities, or...who ask
                     traditional kinds of humanities-oriented questions about computing
                     technologies" and Abby Smith Rumsey's (2011) definition of digital
                     scholarship as "the use of digital evidence and method, digital
                     authoring, digital publishing, digital curation and preservation, and digital use
                     and reuse of scholarship."
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p5">5</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p5">To date, there has been little research done specifically on digital humanities
                     research relationships between faculty and academic librarians. Lynne Siemens and
                     her
                     colleagues [<a class="ref" href="#siemens2011">Siemens, Cunningham, Duff, and Warwick</a>] have done similar research on relationships
                     in research; however, they interviewed and surveyed members of established research
                     teams working on established projects, where the study presented here investigates
                     more nebulous, emerging relationships between scholars and librarians. An Association
                     of Research Libraries SPEC Kit 326: Digital Humanities (2011) surveys ARL member
                     libraries on their successes and failures offering digital scholarship support
                     services. The results show that, as demand for these services grows, librarians are
                     reconsidering an ad hoc approach to digital humanities services and beginning to
                     adopt more scalable, sustainable, and permanent programmatic approaches. However,
                     the
                     direction of these developments in libraries is still unclear. Many responses in the
                     ARL study reported on the early stages of digital humanities services; libraries are
                     still developing services, and library staff are struggling to decide on the level
                     of
                     service and the need for dedicated staff. The picture that emerges from the ARL study
                     is of an evolving field; questions still remain about how already-established digital
                     humanities services address the needs of DH initiatives on their campus, and the
                     sorts of activities those librarians perform. The ARL survey also provides a broad
                     overview of what the responding ARL libraries are doing, rather than an in-depth
                     perspective on the day-to-day of faculty research lives of doing digital
                     scholarship.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p6">6</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p6">The digital humanities, as a field, holds interest for scholars because it is still
                     in the process of defining itself as a technologically oriented discipline (and is
                     even currently in the process of being questioned about whether it is a field, or
                     a
                     methodology, or a passing fad). Marija Dalbello outlines the chronological
                     development of the field of digital humanities, taking as evidence the facts that
                     it
                     has its own journals (<cite class="title italic">Journal of Digital Humanities</cite>,
                     <cite class="title italic">Digital Humanities Quarterly)</cite>, conference (called
                     simply Digital Humanities), and body of literature [<a class="ref" href="#dalbello2011">Dalbello 2011</a>].
                     Dalbello emphasizes the relevance of digital library development to DH scholarship,
                     by focusing on text analysis and digitization as digital humanities practice as
                     opposed to non-text-based activities like geospatial analysis.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p7">7</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p7">Librarians have been interested in digital humanities research since its emergence
                     from humanities computing in the early part of the century, particularly within the
                     context of the universities that are part of the Center for Institutional Cooperation
                     (CIC) collaborative. CIC is home to three major DH centers: MATRIX at Michigan State
                     University, CDRH at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln, and the Institute for
                     Computing in the Humanities, Arts, and Social Sciences (I-CHASS) at the University
                     of
                     Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, as well as more grassroots DH initiatives at other CIC
                     schools (which could include lab spaces within humanities departments and libraries,
                     seminar series, etc.). Blossoming activity in CIC universities has foreshadowed more
                     explicit collaboration that now seems to be emerging.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p8">8</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p8">CIC held its first Digital Humanities Summit at University of Nebraska-Lincoln in
                     spring 2012, when sixty faculty, librarians, and administrators as participants
                     gathered to compare the status of digital humanities activities in member
                     universities. One major recommendation of the 2012 summit was to recruit the highest
                     quality faculty and graduate students to CIC institutions for digital research. In
                     order to do this, the committee recommends that non-traditional, digital scholarship
                     should be weighted as equal when making tenure decisions, as they found that many
                     faculty did not engage in digital humanities work until after they achieved tenure.
                     The important roles that libraries play in supporting DH scholarship are mentioned
                     in
                     the report numerous times. Besides becoming increasingly responsible for
                     disseminating open access scholarship, the CIC notes that "we also need to acknowledge the importance of
                     interdisciplinary and collaborative work — a norm in digital scholarship. Some
                     of the best digital work is conducted in team of scholars, librarians,
                     technologists, and students (both graduate and undergraduate)"
                      [<a class="ref" href="#cic2012">CIC 2012</a>, 7].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p9">9</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p9">The CIC report also states that "scholars, librarians, archivists, and technologists should be
                     partners in digital initiatives current accessibility and future
                     sustainability"
                      [<a class="ref" href="#cic2012">CIC 2012</a>, 1]. In digital scholarship literature, libraries are often mentioned in the
                     context of preserving or facilitating access to digital scholarship, but not taking
                     part in the scholarship itself. Andrew W. Mellon Foundation program officer Donald
                     Waters identifies universities, their libraries, and academic presses as should-be
                     supporters of digital humanities work: "Going forward — as centers of humanistic research and
                     teaching-universities, their libraries, and academic presses must support the
                     digital humanities, but where should they place their emphasis? I would
                     suggest, first, that it is critically important that they be alert to the
                     particular strands of research being pursued"
                      [<a class="ref" href="#waters2013">Waters 2013</a>, 8]. This issue of being "alert" to the types of research being pursued on
                     campuses indeed came up in the findings of this study.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p10">10</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p10">Libraries have indeed taken up the pursuit of being hubs for digital humanities
                     research and collaboration. Jennifer Vinopal and Monica McCormick have addressed the
                     main challenges in developing infrastructure for digital scholarship support,
                     including defining priorities, staffing, ongoing organizational change, and beyond
                     [<a class="ref" href="#vinopal2013">Vinopal and McCormick 2013</a>]. They propose a four-tiered model, ranging from
                     academic and administrative tool support, the most widely used, to grant-funded
                     research, with institutional repositories, copyright consultation, and bulk data
                     loads sitting in between. Based on these different levels of support, they note that
                     librarians must engage with the entire research process more than ever before.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p11">11</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p11">Miriam Posner has written extensively (on Twitter, her blog, and in scholarly
                     journals) on the challenges of supporting digital humanities in the library [<a class="ref" href="#posner2013">Posner 2013</a>]. As with Vinopal and McCormick, Posner points out that
                     often the support for digital scholarship must be built out of and around the
                     library’s core mission, be part of a strategic vision, and have support from library
                     leadership. If supporting that type of work is a "distraction" from a particular
                     library’s core values, then perhaps it is not in the best interest of the library.
                     Posner also notes tensions about service vs. servitude and the tension around whether
                     librarians have equal status with faculty in fostering digital humanities
                     scholarship. Building on Vinopal and McCormick’s thoughts on infrastructure, and
                     Waters’ urging that institutional bodies be aware of particular research strands,
                     Posner contends that librarians must be knowledgeable as humanists: "Many of the problems we have faced ‘supporting’ digital
                     humanities work may stem from the fact that digital humanities projects in
                     general do not need supporters — they need collaborators. Libraries need to
                     provide infrastructure (access to digitization tools and servers, for example)
                     to support digital humanities work, but they need thoughtful, skilled,
                     knowledgeable humanists to actually work on it"
                      [<a class="ref" href="#posner2013">Posner 2013</a>, 45].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p12">12</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p12">Previous research has been done on faculty-librarian coordination. After surveying
                     the literature on faculty and instructional librarians, Kate Manuel, Susan E. Beck,
                     and Molly Molloy found that faculty consider librarians to be more service providers
                     than teachers [<a class="ref" href="#manuel2005">Manuel, Beck, and Molloy 2005</a>]. Reasons ranged from faculty not
                     considering librarians to be their academic equals to disbelief that librarians had
                     enough subject expertise in their area, particularly the sciences. In a stark
                     contrast to the literature the authors cited, the professors they interviewed were
                     enthusiastic about and had deep respect for their institution’s librarians. In fact,
                     one of the reasons they asked librarians to do instruction in their classroom was
                     because of the idea of librarian as "expert witness." Librarians served as
                     outside influence for students, emphasizing and giving more credibility to the
                     professors; they also show another part of the research universe of which the
                     students are a part. Work has also been done on collaboration of research teams doing
                     digital research. Siemens found that, through individual interviews with members of
                     research teams and surveys to digital humanities listservs, humanities research is
                     growing more complex and technologically sophisticated, so it often requires a team
                     approach — sometimes between scholars and librarians [<a class="ref" href="#siemens2011">Siemens, Cunningham, Duff, and Warwick</a>].
                     Librarians have information management skills that are useful to DH researchers;
                     however, librarians do not want their values of public service to be confused with
                     servitude. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p13">13</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p13">More recently, there have been more voices speaking against the idea of librarians
                     as
                     service providers from the library side. Trevor Muñoz has written specifically on
                     the
                     problem of calling digital humanities a "service" in academic libraries, along
                     with the problems of identifying academic labor and power balances in the academy
                     [<a class="ref" href="#mu%C3%B1oz2012">Muñoz 2012</a>]. Micah Vandegrift and Stewart Varner have made bolder
                     claims, including that librarians "need to proudly identify themselves as DHers, and fully
                     expect to be regarded as such by peers, colleagues, faculty and administrators,
                     and let the broad work they do engage with that community"
                      [<a class="ref" href="#vandegrift2013">Vandegrift and Varner 2013</a>, 76]. The aim of this research project is to test the real-world implications of
                     that claim.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Methodology </h1>
                  
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p14">14</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p14">This research project aims to build on, and further refine, the work done in the
                     Association of Research Libraries (ARL) SPEC Kit 326: Digital Humanities (2011). The
                     participants are from the Committee on Institutional Cooperation (CIC) libraries,
                     for
                     several reasons: first, to build on and to sample a different population from the
                     ARL
                     SPEC Kit 326 survey population, and second, because there are major digital
                     humanities centers within the CIC (e.g. MATRIX at Michigan State University, Center
                     for Digital Research in the Humanities at University of Nebraska Lincoln, University
                     of Maryland’s Maryland Institute for Technology in the Humanities), as well as the
                     fact that the CIC itself has declared their desire to be known for DH [<a class="ref" href="#cic2012">CIC 2012</a>]. The population for this project is academic librarians
                     (and/or academic support staff, postdoctoral researchers, etc. who work in an
                     academic library setting) and faculty members who identify as doing some type of
                     digital scholarship, digital humanities, or humanities computing type of research
                     in
                     the United States. Because of this rather specific population, and the exploratory
                     nature of this project, the researcher used purposive sampling to individually
                     identify suitable participants <a class="noteRef" href="#d4e328">[2]</a>. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p15">15</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p15">It must also be noted that the relationship between faculty and librarians at CIC
                     schools may not be representative of the relationship between faculty and librarians
                     at all academic institutions. The CIC is made up of large, public research
                     institutions that have different resources from, for example, a small private liberal
                     arts college. The course loads and teaching expectations may be different for both
                     faculty and librarians at these different types of institutions and may influence
                     the
                     relationship between these groups.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Research Questions </h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p16">16</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p16">This project was designed to identify points of convergence and tease out any
                     tensions that exist in faculty-librarian relationships in digital humanities research
                     projects. The following questions guided the research, to that end:
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="ptext">
                     <ol class="list">
                        <li class="item">What are the unique needs of digital humanities scholars in terms of research
                           support?
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">What do faculty and academic librarians expect of each other in the realm of
                           digital scholarship?
                           <div class="ptext">
                              <ol class="list">
                                 <li class="item">in terms of physical space, technology, and collections, and the ways in
                                    which each are used?
                                 </li>
                              </ol>
                           </div>
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">For librarians whose work is related to digital scholarship, is collaborating
                           on research with scholars, faculty, or students more important, or is providing
                           "service(s)" — the more traditional support role of librarians?
                           <div class="ptext">
                              <ol class="list">
                                 <li class="item">Are there common underlying tensions in librarian-scholar relationships,
                                    such as that of service vs. servitude?
                                 </li>
                              </ol>
                           </div>
                        </li>
                     </ol>
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Data Gathering Methods</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p17">17</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p17">In order to get the nuanced, individual perspectives of both faculty and librarians,
                     this research study utilized semi-structured telephone, Google Hangout, or Skype
                     interviews to explore the collaborative relationship between faculty and academic
                     librarians when doing digital humanities research, including attitudes toward
                     collaborating with or supporting others. Similar but distinctive interview protocols
                     were developed for a librarian/academic staff group and a faculty group. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p18">18</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p18">Given the emergent nature of the discipline, there are limited numbers of librarians
                     in the United States who are explicitly charged with digital humanities liaison
                     responsibility, not to mention a limited number of higher education institutions
                     engaging in digital humanities activities. To identify interview subjects, the
                     researcher performed targeted research via directories on institutional websites,
                     scholarly blogs, Twitter, DH listservs, and so on to identify individuals with
                     digital humanities or digital scholarships titles, as well as welcome references from
                     participants. After identifying participants, the researcher sent individual email
                     requests for interviews. The interviews were recorded for audio for later
                     transcription. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p19">19</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p19">The researcher developed, tested, and used two different interview protocols: one
                     for
                     the faculty participants and one for the librarian/staff participants. Separate
                     interview protocols were necessary in order to obtain the best data from the two
                     different groups — while some questions were similar, such as the questions about
                     preferred terms for digital humanities, others were different in order to get a
                     representation of each person's individual outlook, experiences, and opinions.
                     Questions included preferred terms and definitions, faculty expectations of their
                     institution and their library, how librarians expected DH scholars to use the
                     library, library outreach and planning for DH activities, and the needed expertise
                     on
                     the parts of both faculty and librarians/staff. The interviews were conducted in
                     March 2014.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p20">20</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p20">The goal in recruiting participants for this project was to have one
                     faculty-librarian pair from as many of the CIC institutions as possible. Gathering
                     data from faculty-librarian pairs from several different schools would give even more
                     nuanced insight into these collaborative relationships, and the perspectives each
                     group holds, because they are on the same campus and are participating in the same
                     activities. The interviews were conducted individually, allowing for open-ended
                     questions, the opportunity for spontaneous follow-up questions tailored to each
                     participant, and for different topics to come up that the researcher may not have
                     been aware of as being important. Qualitative interviews are useful for revealing
                     emotional information — such as questions about working relationships between faculty
                     scholars and librarians, tensions, and the desire to be a collaborator or a service
                     provider.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p21">21</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p21">The interviews were recorded, transcribed, and analyzed for overarching patterns and
                     themes, which were categorized and named. The researcher analyzed the interview
                     responses for similar patterns in faculty’s and librarians’ responses: are they aware
                     of each others’ expectations, or is there a disconnect in perceptions? Do librarians
                     identify as scholars, or "customer service professionals"? What do faculty
                     consider the most important when it comes to librarian expertise, and what do
                     librarians identify as critical in being able to engage with DH work on campus?
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Findings</h1>
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Demographics</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p22">22</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p22">The study included 11 people: 5 faculty, 4 librarians, and 2 postdoctoral
                     researchers, positioned in the library and thus included in the "library" group.
                     The faculty members held appointments in the following academic departments: English,
                     History, Rhetoric, Philosophy, and Classics. One faculty member also served as a
                     curator faculty member also served as a curator in the university’s museum. Of the
                     11
                     participants, there were four pairs, leaving one faculty member and the two
                     library-affiliated postdocs as "single" participants.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p23">23</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p23">The findings are detailed in five sections: I), the best model for engaging DH
                     scholars, II), what domain expertise is needed, III), the areas in which faculty and
                     librarians agree, IV), the areas in which they disagree (tensions), and finally, V),
                     where the two groups have a perceptual disconnect. From the data analysis, two
                     overarching themes emerged: tensions and agreement between the two groups. Within
                     and
                     related to those two themes, there are several sub themes: best practices for digital
                     humanities librarians, domain expertise, and disconnects. 
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">I. Best Model for Engagement of Digital Humanities Scholars</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p24">24</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p24">One of the questions posed to the library-affiliated group was "How are you or your team engaging with DH scholarship on your campus?" in
                     order to explore the expectations faculty and librarians hold for themselves and each
                     other. The most successful model for DH engagement for libraries seems to be actively
                     going out on to campus. This is not to say that having a "center" or a lab where
                     scholars can come in and ask questions is ineffective, but most of the schools in
                     this research project do not have a definitive digital humanities center. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p25">25</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p25">Of the six librarian participants, most detailed a case-by-case or consultative
                     approach, noting that some collaborations happened organically: one librarian said
                     that it was about "making yourself available to people. Go to colloquia, go to
                     brownbags, go to events; invite people to events at the library, think about
                     creating events where you can have people from different departments be on a
                     panel...All of those things have been successful for us in outreach." The
                     lack of a robust workflow also played into the consultation model. Another librarian
                     described their process as "a scholar comes to me or someone in the [office] or
                     to someone they know who has the expertise and then we pull together the team who
                     would be needed for that project. We’re hoping to get a better workflow together.
                     They come to the library with help for metadata and collections, but then they go
                     [somewhere else on campus] when they need the computing power."
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p26">26</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p26">There were mixed statements among the librarians about either working to bring
                     scholars back into the library or going to their departments. One participant talked
                     about the library’s delivery service to offices and labs, which keeps scholars from
                     having to come in; that library is looking into redeveloping or expanding library
                     space to bring faculty back and to develop working relationships with them. Other
                     librarian participants stated that they had the most success in going to different
                     departmental events, "seeing what kinds of questions people had," or
                     hosting library events outside of the library, with one emphasizing that "my
                     concern is that we’re involved in the research." The concern about
                     librarians being familiar with the scholarship will be addressed in the following
                     sections.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">II. Domain Expertise</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p27">27</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p27">Other questions on both the faculty and the librarian protocols involved needed
                     expertise for digital humanities research and expertise for supporting DH research.
                     Several people, both faculty and librarians, mentioned programming and coding
                     knowledge. There was not a general consensus on whether or not one absolutely needs
                     to be able to program: one faculty member felt strongly that everyone should know
                     how
                     to code, while other faculty members pushed against that. From the anecdotal evidence
                     that the librarians provided it seems that there are varying degrees of technical
                     expertise in the library, but that it is quite substantial. More broadly, this is
                     connected with other domain knowledge: several faculty brought up the importance of
                     librarians being familiar with their field, though not necessarily having secondary
                     degrees in it.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">IIa. Programming Expertise</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p28">28</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p28"> One faculty participant firmly believed that "everyone" should learn
                     programming, that it is an essential skill, that it is flexible and can be applied
                     to
                     many different things. However, the other four faculty interviewees spoke less
                     strongly about the need for coding expertise — they noted that they did not have time
                     to learn, or would rather spend that time on more humanistic research, or even that
                     they were "builders," in the Ramsay sense [<a class="ref" href="#ramsay2011">Ramsay 2011</a>],
                     by doing community building rather than technical building. Another faculty
                     participant said that "I don’t know that it’s necessary for librarians to have
                     high-level technical coding abilities... I think some great librarians are ones
                     that can connect people to those that have that [programming] ability,"
                     recognizing that one of librarians’ skills is the ability to identify and refer users
                     to a more relevant person. Other technical skills that both the scholars and
                     librarians possessed that were not programming skills were XML, XSLT, TEI, and other
                     markup languages. Others also stated that being open to learning new digital
                     techniques was important, as was the ability to understand code without having to
                     learn various programming languages.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">IIb. Academic Expertise</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p29">29</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p29">One faculty interviewee spoke particularly highly of his institution’s librarian
                     pair, most notably because the librarian also held an advanced degree in the faculty
                     member’s subject area; this, combined with his library science degree, made
                     collaborating on projects more productive, easier, and more enjoyable. However,
                     several scholar participants stressed that it is not a requirement for librarians
                     to
                     have additional advanced degrees in humanities disciplines. One faculty respondent
                     noted that "you need to know the kinds of questions to ask your faculty to know
                     what would help facilitate work in their research."
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p30">30</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p30"> Speaking on both academic and programming expertise, another scholar interviewee
                     stated that "I don’t think librarians have to become programmers. I think, in a
                     way, they need to become better humanities scholars. Just in the sense of asking
                     questions… the thing I worry about is the model of the customer-service provider
                     will dominate and replace the idea of the librarian being someone to engage in
                     intellectual inquiry with."
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">III. Faculty-Librarian Consensus</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p31">31</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p31">Two topics came up repeatedly about which all participants seemed to agree: scholars’
                     needs for metadata and special collections. There were several questions for both
                     groups that asked how scholars make use of the library, with probes for uses of
                     physical space, technology, and collections. One librarian mentioned that scholars
                     are using rare materials more frequently, especially when the material is something
                     not found in Google Books; she also predicted that rare materials will be used
                     "more actively" in the future. A faculty interviewee responded that
                     "we don’t use collections, but we do use expertise [of librarians]. We have a
                     good special collections librarian that we’ve worked with over the years...for
                     digitizing." Every participant brought up special collections as a way they
                     make use of the library, or, on the librarians’ side, the way they expect faculty
                     to
                     use the library. Special collections serve as a main entry point for both faculty
                     and
                     students, because they are comprised of physical items for which scholars must
                     consult librarians, or students must in order to gain access. In terms of
                     collaboration in digital scholarship, this is both a boon and a bane: rare physical
                     objects that the library holds brings researchers into the physical library, to
                     interact with library staff, but it also means that scholars whose work does not
                     involve rare materials may never go into the physical library or work with a
                     librarian or library collections. One librarian participant spoke about how his
                     library is working to support scholars’ use of rare materials beyond just having them
                     available (i.e. digitizing rare materials), though he noted that "this isn’t the
                     most common use of the library": 
                     
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>
                           Special collections are different [from other library collections] because
                           there are people interested in either literature of previous centuries, or
                           history, or history of book, material culture around the book; those are people
                           who find their way to special collections. There are a few people in English and
                           History who have strong interest in having more collections in some digital form
                           to use, manipulate, what have you… what can we do to support that? Do we have
                           software, technology?... faculty want digitized material [including digitized
                           letters for a historical project]. 
                        </p>
                     </blockquote>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p32">32</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p32">Indeed, digitization was brought up by multiple participants. Within one
                     faculty-librarian pair, each brought up working with the other on the faculty’s
                     digital history course. In fact, both mentioned that that particular course was what
                     sparked an ongoing relationship between the department and the library. Special
                     collections librarians, archivists, and digital librarians worked with students to
                     digitize and use rare materials. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p33">33</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p33">Digital humanities scholars’ use of metadata was another area that both interview
                     groups agreed was a valuable asset for the library to support and provide services.
                     One faculty participant said that "the humanities tend to use metadata...quite
                     extensively, but they really don’t understand it, they don’t understand data
                     modeling and best practices... One of the things that is needed to be successful
                     in DH is to start with really solid infrastructure and really good data plans; it
                     doesn’t matter if you’re working with media, text, what have you. Libraries have
                     been indispensable partners." The study participants at the other
                     institutions tended to agree with that statement, at least to the extent that having
                     good data is important, being able to understand your data is important, and that
                     librarians have the expertise in that area. Several librarian interviewees brought
                     up
                     individuals going to the library for help with metadata; the metadata librarians
                     assisted with that. Librarians also facilitated access to and provided training in
                     analyzing metadata; one faculty participant stated that the librarians were, in fact,
                     training him in how to use MARC records, which were central to his research.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p34">34</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p34">In fact, several participants in the library group are responding to that need for
                     metadata and metadata training by planning workshops and training sessions for the
                     coming academic year, as well as working to promote the library’s own metadata and
                     "making it available for humanists to do computational analysis on large
                     parts of the collection," as one librarian said. 
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">IV. Tensions</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p35">35</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p35">As Geoffrey Rockwell has noted: "one of the sites of
                     [stress] in the digital humanities has been the inclusion of those alternative
                     academics without faculty jobs" [<a class="ref" href="#rockwell2013">Rockwell 2013</a>]. He traces the inclusion of non-faculty
                     researchers — such as librarians — to the beginnings of digital humanities and the
                     inclusive nature of the community. While digital humanities as a community still
                     prides itself on that inclusiveness, there remains tension around librarians
                     participating as scholars alongside faculty. It is important to note that none of
                     the
                     five faculty participants espoused first-hand opinions about librarians or staff not
                     "belonging" in the digital humanities community, or on digital scholarship
                     research teams. However, one faculty interviewee talked at length about the
                     phenomenon of heavy library representation at DH seminars, which causes faculty and
                     graduate students to not show up — because they do not think it is "meant"
                     for scholars such as themselves: 
                     
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>We’ve held a reading seminar and it’s been held at the humanities institute on
                           campus. Most of the research reading seminars tend to attract almost exclusively
                           professors and graduate students. However, the DH reading seminar has attracted
                           many, many librarians and technologists, sometimes more so than professors and
                           grad students. That’s been great, but I think it’s raised some unwritten
                           hierarchies at the university. My impression is the more librarians and
                           technologists come, the fewer faculty and graduate students come. They arrive… and
                           see there aren’t people from their immediate circle of colleagues. The librarians…
                           ask some different questions. There’s been a real challenge in working across the
                           boundaries of training and perspective in one group.
                        </p>
                     </blockquote>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p36">36</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p36">Other faculty respondents noted the need for librarians to be more aware of the types
                     of humanities questions that are going on in their fields, as stated above in section
                     IIb on academic expertise. This seems to reinforce the earlier-quoted participant
                     on
                     working "across the boundaries of training and perspective."
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">V. Faculty-Librarian Disconnect</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p37">37</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p37">Throughout the interviews with faculty members it became clear that they were
                     operating under the possible fallacy that digital humanities has "arrived" at
                     the library, but not yet in the humanities departments. All were extremely
                     enthusiastic about and spoke very highly of the librarians they have worked with on
                     DH projects. One said that "I really prefer to think of my colleagues in the
                     library as partners than as resources… The people I work with in the library are
                     really smart, they usually know more about what’s current in DH than I do, because
                     I’m set in my own research." This reveals the potential for digital
                     scholarship librarians to be specialists in DH support and a resource for a broad,
                     current overview of the DH field. A librarian participant enthused that "we are
                     much more collaborators and researchers than just the point person for "get me
                     this book or resource." So, it’s an exciting transition, we’re being welcomed,
                     really, onto these research teams, and we have a lot to contribute. I think all
                     librarians should at least dip a toe into exploring [digital
                     humanities]."
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p38">38</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p38">This statement reflects a clearly positive attitude: faculty consider librarians
                     research partners and colleagues, they see sustainability in librarians providing
                     training to scholars and graduate students, and even view iSchools (schools that have
                     evolved from programs previously centered around library and information science,
                     informatics, and others) as hubs for DH activity and training. On the library side,
                     however, the librarians expressed that DH is not (yet) a unified effort of the
                     library. One librarian noted that collaboration is really just getting started at
                     his
                     institution; another spoke on subject librarians wanting or even needing to engage
                     with DH work with their faculty but lacking the time for training in it. Part of the
                     reason for this, he went on, is that there is no "top-down" initiative that
                     would provide subject liaisons or other librarians the time and space in their job
                     for digital scholarship training. Also, there was some disconnect in one particular
                     pair about the "willingness" with which the library is embracing DH and its
                     maturity: the faculty member saw the library as unified and enthusiastic about
                     digital scholarship. He felt that "there doesn’t seem to be the backlash against
                     DH as such, it seems that there’s a culture, they [the library] recognize that
                     it’s a culture, they recognize that it’s its own set of disciplinary expectations.
                     It’s a much more mature discipline to librarians that it is often to the
                     faculty," and that his institution’s library was already well-organized and
                     had a well-established definition for digital scholarship work: "There seems to
                     be reticence to fully embrace DH on the part of humanities faculty. On the library
                     side, there’s a huge interest in and willingness to embrace DH as the moniker
                     under which we do our work." However, his librarian pair was much more
                     cautious in declaring any unified efforts in digital humanities, as such, at his
                     library.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p39">39</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p39">Another faculty participant did realize and mention that "librarians aren’t
                     appreciated for their expertise as real scholars," but sees DH as a space
                     where rank doesn’t matter — making it natural for librarians to work in that space.
                     Notably, another librarian participant was most aligned with the faculty enthusiasm
                     for the maturity of digital humanities support in libraries, but he specifically
                     brought up not seeing that support as a service vs. collaboration dichotomy: his
                     institution models it as a spectrum of
                     collection-instruction-consultation-collaboration, rather than reducing DH support
                     infrastructure to service provider or partner. This participant also eschewed that
                     support vs. collaborator distinction as unproductive: "You have someone come in
                     [to the library], they have a research question already, they might ask if you
                     want to collaborate… it [happens organically]... We’ve found that consultation
                     often turns into collaboration. Similarly, instruction turns into consultation for
                     the faculty you taught the class for, which can lead to collaboration."
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p40">40</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p40">However, it is important to recognize the issues around collaboration in humanities
                     disciplines. One faculty participant brought up the stigma against multiple authors
                     in humanities scholarship, saying that "[I wouldn’t want to say] that the most
                     important thing for a librarian is to be a collaborator, then throw them into the
                     situation where it’s hard for them to find someone to collaborate with. We need to
                     work on the institutional side to credential effectively collaborative work… they
                     do it in social sciences, why can’t we do it in the humanities? ...the humanities
                     don’t do much to incentivize collaboration."
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Discussion</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p41">41</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p41">As one faculty participant noted, there seems to be a natural affinity between the
                     digital humanities and librarians: "There’s often a sense where librarians
                     aren’t appreciated for their expertise as real scholars, and I think that’s often
                     true of the digital humanities. There tends not to be as much focus on rank and
                     where you’re at [in digital humanities], it’s more the expertise you bring to the
                     table." The results of this study, especially the finding that faculty see
                     DH support infrastructure in libraries as more established and mature than it
                     realistically is, will aid academic librarians and library staff in strategic
                     planning around the digital humanities. This could include more strategic outreach,
                     making the strengths of digital scholarship/digital humanities/digital initiatives
                     librarians more explicitly known, hosting more events outside of the library, and
                     so
                     on. Conversely, it could also take the form that one librarian participant detailed:
                     not necessarily a "DH center", but creating offices or residencies for faculty
                     to bring them back into the library, beyond providing special collections services.
                     It may also prove enlightening to digital humanities faculty in approaching their
                     respective librarians both for support for projects (i.e. using library collections,
                     learning to use metadata, specialized workshops) and as potential collaborators.
                     Scholars have the space to have a more active voice in shaping their library's
                     digital humanities support; in fact, librarians often welcome their faculty taking
                     an
                     active stance in using and/or requesting library resources in the DH space.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p42">42</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p42">A compelling point that arose from one interview was one librarian’s 4-tier model
                     for
                     supporting digital scholarship, while simultaneously moving away from the arguably
                     unproductive dichotomy of librarians as collaborators versus supporters. As described
                     earlier, the four tiers include collection, instruction, consultation, and
                     collaboration. Professors might approach librarians to use collections, to use
                     collections for teaching, or they might ask for consultation on using collections
                     or
                     tools for their own research. Any of these paths might lead organically to
                     collaboration between faculty and non-faculty scholars, based on individual research
                     interests and expertise. This is a useful model to think about digital scholarship
                     support without the equally unproductive polarization of whether or not a library
                     needs a DH center. There are also implications for librarian training and
                     re-skilling. Multiple librarians brought up the time it takes to learn enough about
                     digital scholarship to be able to answer scholars’ questions, especially in regard
                     to
                     subject librarians. One participant mentioned the development of "demystifying
                     DH" sessions for librarians.  However, that is beyond the scope of this
                     project; gathering the thoughts, anxieties, and successes of subject liaisons in
                     supporting their departments’ needs in digital scholarship would be helpful to
                     librarians’ understanding of how to position themselves to support DH work. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p43">43</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p43">Several faculty participants commented on the tensions around interdisciplinary
                     collaboration. As one participant said, "there’s a lot of distrust between
                     different disciplines and schools...the payoff is not that much to do
                     interdisciplinary work if you’re embedded in different departments. The way it’s
                     set up is to not encourage collaboration across boundaries." This In regards
                     to the comments of one faculty participant on the problems of working across
                     departments and different schools within his institution, and that collaboration is
                     not encouraged: this problem could be tempered by his librarian pair’s success in
                     engaging DH scholars by going out on to campus, his opinion that events should
                     behosting more library events happening outside of the library, and librarians going
                     directly to the scholars, etc. In cases where there are problems of disciplinary
                     "silos," there could be potential for the library and librarians to foster
                     some cross-departmental work in the same way that this participant has. In fact, that
                     particular faculty interviewee expressed excitement over the library as a place for
                     engagement with the digital, and not a "customer service model." He said
                     that librarians have a different perspective in creating an environment for scholarly
                     work, and that his library has "been a good neutral space for sidestepping some
                     of the turf battles and get down to the research they’re interested in."
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Conclusion</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p44">44</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p44">As Schaffner and Erway have suggested, there is currently much to be figured
                     out in how research libraries should position themselves to support digital
                     scholarship and digital humanities [<a class="ref" href="#schaffner2014">Schaffner and Erway 2014</a>]. Several approaches are utilized at the moment:
                     the ad hoc, consultative approach — which the majority of participants in this study
                     advocated — or a one-size-fits-all suite of services. One of the original driving
                     questions behind this project was whether faculty need and want individuals who are
                     research partners and co-investigators on projects, or whether they prefer ad hoc
                     services. The answer is not on either side of that line, but rather on both sides:
                     librarians and library staff can provide ad hoc DH services while also being research
                     partners; in fact, several participants reported that their partnerships were the
                     result of an initial consultation with a librarian that grew into lengthier
                     collaborations.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p45">45</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p45">For future research, it may be worthwhile to do paired faculty/librarian interviews
                     both at universities that have an "official" digital humanities center and at
                     universities that do not, and measure whether there is correlation between an
                     institution having a DH center and the ways the faculty think of librarians and the
                     library’s potential for support. If a school has no digital humanities center, then
                     often the humanities departments are unaware of the digitally-related services that
                     their library offers. The nature of the school — public or private, large or small,
                     research- or teaching-oriented — would be another interesting factor to include. As
                     noted in the Methodology section, these findings may not be applicable to all
                     faculty-librarian relationships outside of the CIC. Several CIC schools have
                     well-established DH centers, and accordingly those schools have had more time to
                     negotiate partnerships and collaboration styles. Another theme that emerged from this
                     project was the need to study curriculum around digital humanities. Surprisingly,
                     though there were no interview questions specifically about teaching, many
                     participants talked about changing or "overhauling" the curriculum, or
                     about using the library in their digital humanities courses. However, it was unclear
                     whether course content was tied to faculty’s research. There is more work to be done
                     in this area.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p46">46</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p46">Much of these anxieties about the role of librarians in digital research could very
                     well be tied to conversations about the future of libraries themselves. Indeed, a
                     scholar participant brought this up independently, shining a light on why libraries
                     are prime locations not just for digital humanities research, but for new media
                     studies and digital scholarship — a broad umbrella: "The library seems like this
                     amazing place, this building with people in it, a central location on campus, it
                     has lots of books in it… what an amazing place to situate the exploration of
                     what’s good about the digital, what does the digital not do?"
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Acknowledgements</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p47">47</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p47">I would like to acknowledge the generous participation from the librarians, faculty,
                     and postdoctoral researchers who graciously took the time to be interviewed for this
                     study. I would also like to thank Associate Professor Paul Conway at the University
                     of Michigan School of Information for his thoughtful comments, guidance, assistance,
                     and advice in shaping this study.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Appendix: Interview Protocols</h1>
                  
                  <h1 class="head">FACULTY</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p48">48</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p48">1. What is your title? What department are you a part of?</div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p49">49</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p49">2. Do you have any other appointments in other departments?</div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p50">50</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p50">3. From the reading I’ve done in DH, I’ve come across many different terms and
                     definitions. At the U-M School of Information we use “digital humanities.” How do
                     you
                     define DH and what terms do you use at your institution?
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p51">51</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p51">4. What do you expect of your institution in terms of support for DH research?</div>
                  
                  <div class="ptext">
                     <ul class="list">
                        <li class="item">What do you expect of the library?</li>
                        <li class="item">What about library space, technology, and collections?</li>
                        <li class="item">Do you have a DH center?</li>
                        <li class="item">Based on your answer, do you see this as an extension of things already
                           happening, or something new?
                        </li>
                     </ul>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p52">52</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p52">5. Have you been involved in DH planning at your institution, in the last year or
                     so?
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p53">53</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p53">6. From my understanding, it takes a lot of expertise to do DH research. What
                     expertise is needed for your work?
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="ptext">
                     <ul class="list">
                        <li class="item">What do you see as the library’s role?</li>
                     </ul>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p54">54</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p54">7. My reading suggests that libraries could support DH in a number of ways…</div>
                  
                  <div class="ptext">
                     <ul class="list">
                        <li class="item">What expertise do librarians need? Is it more DIY or just dividing up the
                           labor?
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">Which role is most important for librarians when it comes to digital humanities
                           in the library: collaborator or service provider?
                        </li>
                     </ul>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p55">55</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p55">8. Anything else you’d like to add?</div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">LIBRARIAN</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p56">56</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p56">1. What is your job title?</div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p57">57</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p57">2. What do the reporting lines look like for your position? Do you hold any other
                     appointments?
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p58">58</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p58">3. From the reading I’ve done in DH, I’ve come across many different terms and
                     definitions. At the U-M School of Information we use “digital humanities.” How do
                     you
                     define DH and what terms do you use at your institution?
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p59">59</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p59">4. How do you expect faculty to make use of your physical space, technology, and
                     collections?
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="ptext">
                     <ul class="list">
                        <li class="item">Do you have a DH center?</li>
                        <li class="item">Based on your answer, do you see this as an extension of things already
                           happening, or something new?
                        </li>
                     </ul>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p60">60</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p60">5. Is digital humanities part of your library’s strategic plan?</div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p61">61</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p61">6. What, if any, activities are planned in the next fiscal year for DH at your
                     library?
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p62">62</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p62">7. How is your library thinking about digital humanities? What activities, training,
                     new hires, or outreach are you planning, if any?
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p63">63</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p63">8. How are you or your team engaging with DH scholarship on your campus?</div>
                  
                  <div class="ptext">
                     <ul class="list">
                        <li class="item">Have you hosted a meeting for DH scholars at the library?</li>
                        <li class="item">Have there been any staff workshops or any DH conferences attended?</li>
                     </ul>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p64">64</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p64">9. Anything else you’d like to add?</div>
                  
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
            </div>
            
            <div id="notes">
               <h2>Notes</h2>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e172"><span class="noteRef">[1]</span>See <a class="ref" href="http://twitter.com/jshhnn/status/431808494597980160" onclick="window.open('http://twitter.com/jshhnn/status/431808494597980160'); return false">http://twitter.com/jshhnn/status/431808494597980160</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e328"><span class="noteRef">[2]</span>The researcher acknowledges, as a potentially
                  limiting factor, that interviewees may have felt the need to give responses that
                  the interviewer wanted to hear as a graduate student researcher, especially
                  because they were, to some degree, familiar with the researcher's positive
                  interest in the digital humanities and her background in libraries.
               </div>
            </div>
            <div id="worksCited">
               <h2>Works Cited</h2>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="bryson2011">
                     <!-- close -->Bryson, Posner, St. Pierre, and Varner 2011</span> Association of Research Libraries. <cite class="title none">SPEC Kit 326: Digital
                     Humanities.</cite> Tim Bryson, Miriam Posner, Alain St. Pierre, and Stewart
                  Varner (2011).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="burgess2011">
                     <!-- close -->Burgess and Hamming 2011</span> Burgess, H. J. and Hamming,
                  J. "New Media in the Academy: Labor and the Production of Knowledge
                  in Scholarly Multimedia."
                  <cite class="title italic">Digital Humanities Quarterly</cite>, 5.3 (2011). <a class="ref" href="http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/5/3/000102/000102.html" onclick="window.open('http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/5/3/000102/000102.html'); return false">http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/5/3/000102/000102.html</a></div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="cic2012">
                     <!-- close -->CIC 2012</span> CIC DIGITAL HUMANITIES SUMMIT REPORT: Executive
                  Summary (2012). <a class="ref" href="https://u.osu.edu/ulman.1/files/2012/10/CIC-DH-Report-Sept-2012-Final.pdf" onclick="window.open('https://u.osu.edu/ulman.1/files/2012/10/CIC-DH-Report-Sept-2012-Final.pdf'); return false">https://u.osu.edu/ulman.1/files/2012/10/CIC-DH-Report-Sept-2012-Final.pdf</a></div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="dalbello2011">
                     <!-- close -->Dalbello 2011</span>  Dalbello, M. "A
                  genealogy of digital humanities."
                  <cite class="title italic">Journal of Documentation</cite> 67.3 (2011): 480. doi
                  10.1108/00220411111124550
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="fitzpatrick2010">
                     <!-- close -->Fitzpatrick 2010</span> Fitzpatrick, K. "Reporting from the Digital Humanities 2010 Conference."
                  ProfHacker (2010). <a class="ref" href="http://chronicle.com/blogs/profhacker/reporting-from-the-digital-humanities-2010-conference/25473" onclick="window.open('http://chronicle.com/blogs/profhacker/reporting-from-the-digital-humanities-2010-conference/25473'); return false">http://chronicle.com/blogs/profhacker/reporting-from-the-digital-humanities-2010-conference/25473</a></div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="kirschenbaum2010">
                     <!-- close -->Kirschenbaum 2010</span> Kirschenbaum, M. G. "What is Digital Humanities and What’s it Doing in English
                  Departments?" ADE Bulletin 150 (2010): 55-61.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="manuel2005">
                     <!-- close -->Manuel, Beck, and Molloy 2005</span> Manuel, K., Beck, S.E.,
                  and Molloy, M. "An ethnographic study of attitudes influencing faculty collaboration
                  in library instruction." <cite class="title italic">The Reference Librarian</cite> 43.89-90
                  (2005): 139. doi:10.1300/J120v43n89_10
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="muñoz2012">
                     <!-- close -->Muñoz 2012</span> Muñoz, T. "Digital
                  humanities in the library isn't a service" (2012). <a class="ref" href="http://trevormunoz.com/notebook/2012/08/19/doing-dh-in-the-library.html" onclick="window.open('http://trevormunoz.com/notebook/2012/08/19/doing-dh-in-the-library.html'); return false">http://trevormunoz.com/notebook/2012/08/19/doing-dh-in-the-library.html</a></div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="posner2013">
                     <!-- close -->Posner 2013</span> Posner, M. "No half
                  measures: Overcoming common challenges to doing digital humanities in the
                  library."
                  <cite class="title italic">Journal of Library Administration</cite> 53.1 (2013):
                  43-52.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="ramsay2011">
                     <!-- close -->Ramsay 2011</span> Ramsay, S. "On
                  Building" (2011). <a class="ref" href="http://stephenramsay.us/text/2011/01/11/on-building/" onclick="window.open('http://stephenramsay.us/text/2011/01/11/on-building/'); return false">http://stephenramsay.us/text/2011/01/11/on-building/</a></div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="rockwell2013">
                     <!-- close -->Rockwell 2013</span> Rockwell, G. "Inclusion in the Digital Humanities." In <cite class="title italic">Defining
                     Digital Humanities: A Reader</cite>, ed. Melissa M. Terras, Julianne Nyhan, and
                  Edward Vanhoutte. 249-253. Ashgate Publishing , Farnham, Surrey, England; Burlington,
                  VT (2013).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="rumsey2011">
                     <!-- close -->Rumsey 2011</span> Rumsey, A. S. "New-Model Scholarly Communication: Road Map for Change." Scholarly
                  Communication Institute 9 (2011). <a class="ref" href="http://www.uvasci.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/04/SCI9-report.pdf" onclick="window.open('http://www.uvasci.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/04/SCI9-report.pdf'); return false">http://www.uvasci.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/04/SCI9-report.pdf</a></div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="schaffner2014">
                     <!-- close -->Schaffner and Erway 2014</span> Schaffner, J., and Erway,
                  R. <cite class="title none">Does Every Research Library Need a Digital Humanities
                     Center?</cite> Dublin, Ohio: OCLC Research (2014). <a class="ref" href="http://www.oclc.org/content/dam/research/publications/library/2014/oclcresearch-digital-humanities-center-2014.pdf" onclick="window.open('http://www.oclc.org/content/dam/research/publications/library/2014/oclcresearch-digital-humanities-center-2014.pdf'); return false">http://www.oclc.org/content/dam/research/publications/library/2014/oclcresearch-digital-humanities-center-2014.pdf</a>
                  (Accessed April 11th, 2014).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="siemens2011">
                     <!-- close -->Siemens, Cunningham, Duff, and Warwick</span> Siemens, L.,
                  Cunningham, R., Duff, W. and Warwick, C. "A tale of two cities:
                  Implications of the similarities and differences in collaborative approaches
                  within the digital libraries and digital humanities communities."
                  <cite class="title italic">Literary and Linguistic Computing</cite> 26.3 (2011): 335.
                  doi:10.1093/llc/fqr028
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="vandegrift2013">
                     <!-- close -->Vandegrift and Varner 2013</span> Vandegrift, M., and
                  Varner, S. "Evolving in common: Creating mutually supportive
                  relationships between libraries and the digital humanities."
                  <cite class="title italic">Journal of Library Administration</cite> 53.1 (2013):
                  67.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="vinopal2013">
                     <!-- close -->Vinopal and McCormick 2013</span> Vinopal, J., and
                  McCormick, M. "Supporting digital scholarship in research
                  libraries: Scalability and sustainability."
                  <cite class="title italic">Journal of Library Administration</cite> 53.1 (2013):
                  27.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="waters2013">
                     <!-- close -->Waters 2013</span> Waters, D. J. "An
                  Overview of the Digital Humanities."
                  <cite class="title italic">Research Library Issues</cite> no. 284 (2013).
               </div>
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar"><a href="#">Preview</a>  |  <span style="color: grey">XML</span> |  <a href="#" onclick="javascript:window.print();" title="Click for print friendly version">Print Article</a></div>
         </div>
      </div>
   </body>
</html>