<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
      <title>[PREVIEW] DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly: </title>
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_screen.css" media="screen" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_print.css" media="print" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" /><style type="text/css">
        #mainContent {
          float: none;
          padding-top: 2em;
          padding-left: 4em;
          padding-right: 4em;
          margin-left: 225px;
           
        }</style></head>
   <body>
      <div id="mainContent">
         <div xmlns:dhqBiblio="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/ns/biblio" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" class="DHQarticle">
            <div id="pubInfo">Preview<br />Volume  Number 
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar">
               <form id="taporware" action="get">
                  <div><a href="//preview/index.html">Preview</a>
                      | 
                     <a rel="external" href="//vol///000422.xml">XML</a>
                     
                     | 
                     		   Discuss
                     			(<a href="/dhq/vol///000422/000422.html#disqus_thread" data-disqus-identifier="000422">
                        				Comments
                        			</a>)
                     
                  </div>
               </form>
            </div>
            
            <div class="DHQheader">
               
               
               
               
               <h1 class="articleTitle lang en">Affective Absence: Risks in the
                  Institutionalization of the FemTechNet Archive
               </h1>
               
               
               <div class="author"><span style="color: grey">Dr. Jeanie Austin</span> &lt;<a href="mailto:jeanie_dot_l_dot_austin_at_gmail_dot_com" onclick="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('jeanie_dot_l_dot_austin_at_gmail_dot_com'); return false;" onkeypress="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('jeanie_dot_l_dot_austin_at_gmail_dot_com'); return false;">jeanie_dot_l_dot_austin_at_gmail_dot_com</a>&gt;, San Francisco Public Library
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               <span class="Z3988" title="url_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;rft_val_fmt=info%3Aofi%2Ffmt%3Akev%3Amtx%3Ajournal&amp;rfr_id=info%3Asid%2Fzotero.org%3A2&amp;rft.genre=article&amp;rft.atitle=Affective%20Absence%3A%20Risks%20in%20the%20Institutionalization%20of%20the%20FemTechNet%20Archive&amp;rft.jtitle=Digital%20Humanities%20Quarterly&amp;rft.stitle=DHQ&amp;rft.issn=1938-4122&amp;rft.date=&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.aulast=Austin&amp;rft.aufirst=Dr. Jeanie&amp;rft.au=Dr. Jeanie%20Austin"> </span></div>
            
            
            <div id="DHQtext">
               
               
               <div id="abstract">
                  <h2>Abstract</h2>
                  
                  
                  <p>FemTechNet is a relatively small and loosely affiliated feminist, anti-racist
                     collective which focuses on overlaps between and implications of feminism and
                     technology. It exists as a support and collaboration structure that challenges
                     traditional hierarchies through distributed power and collective creation. In an
                     examination of hidden labor and archival silences, this research addresses how
                     ideological underpinnings shaped the process of envisioning an institutional
                     archive of FemTechNet records, how principles held by FemTechNet reverberated
                     through the archival process, and how FemTechNet members conceptualized the
                     imagined institutionally-held archive. The research reveals that the collective
                     navigated institutional requirements and resources, the risks inherent in the
                     tensions between the personal and the collective, and affective presence as part
                     of the creation of the records that form the archive.
                  </p>
                  
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Introduction</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p1">1</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p1">FemTechNet is a shifting constellation of academics and community members
                     concerned with the implications that feminism and technology hold in relation to
                     one another. Generated through conversations in 2012, the collective gained
                     ground and recognition for the creation of Distributed Open Collaborative
                     Courses (DOCC) [<a class="ref" href="#juhasz2012">Juhasz and Balsamo 2012</a>]. These courses created moments of
                     <em class="emph">unbalance</em> within pedagogy as a theory and practice through the
                     inclusion of feminist, distributed, non-hierarchical power structures that
                     challenge knowing and teaching through technology with a decidedly feminist
                     lens.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p2">2</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p2">The distribution of knowledge and the disruption of power have been central to
                     the feminist collective since its inception [<a class="ref" href="#femtechnet2014">FemTechNet 2014</a>]. The
                     FemTechNet <em class="emph">Manifesto</em> conveys an understanding of feminism as a
                     feature of individual actors in the network (feminists) and as a set of actions
                     (including accountaibility, collaboration, and care). From its early iterations,
                     the collective “imagined feminism and technology very broadly”
                      [<a class="ref" href="#losh2016">Losh 2016</a>]. By its own proclamation, the network is “part of and bigger than the contemporary
                     university”
                      [<a class="ref" href="#femtechnet2014">FemTechNet 2014</a>]. I became affiliated with (though not a member of) this network in 2017, when
                     I was brought in to created descriptions for materials held in the FemTechNet
                     digital archive under the possibility that it would be placed in an academic,
                     insitutional home.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p3">3</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p3">As in the larger terrain of digital humanities, feminism takes form as a notable
                     absence within academic archives or appears most often as an intervention in
                     that absence [<a class="ref" href="#wernimont2015">Wernimont 2015</a>]. Institutionalization is counter to
                     feminist values as it often contributes to the continued erasure of women,
                     people of color, queers, and others whose precarity is traced through the
                     absence of records ([<a class="ref" href="#balsamo2013">Balsamo et al 2013</a>] in a video dialogue for the
                     DOCC). Simultaneously, institutionalization shapes the archives of projects that
                     lie outside of but are frequently dependent on academic frameworks. The archive
                     discussed herein is not the broad, collected archive often found in digital
                     humanities. Rather, it is the “repository for the historical records of its parent
                     organization”
                      [<a class="ref" href="#theimer2012">Theimer 2012</a>]. The nature of FemTechNet — a distributed collective with members who
                     usually are connected to various academic institutions — disturbs the idea of a
                     “parent” organization through attempts to disrupt
                     hierarchies of belonging. Despite this, FemTechNet’s reliance on institutions is
                     best revealed through its archive in ephemeral objects.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p4">4</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p4">Receipts, schedules, and dropped grant applications combine to show that
                     FemTechNet activities were often shaped by access to resources and powerful
                     institutions. This research strums the tension of placing the records of a
                     collective that was originally organized against the grain of hegemonic
                     processes in academia and specifically within studies of technology into a
                     digital archive to be maintained by an academic institution. <a class="noteRef" href="#d4e224">[1]</a></div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p5">5</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p5">The constraints placed by an academic institutional archive cause a feminist
                     project to lose affective salience. Emotion, friendship, and dissonance exist
                     only as implications in the static archive rather than as central mechanisms of
                     organizational continuity. Affective loss is not only a feature of
                     documentation, it may be a deliberate maneuver to reduce possible risk to
                     members. Risk is held in tension with the consequence of not placing the archive
                     in a resource-rich institution where it will be hosted and maintained. Without
                     the institutional archive, the records of the self-proclaimed anti-racist,
                     feminist project of FemTechNet is lost or left to be reinvented by future
                     collectives. Within the institutional archive, issues of distributed
                     collaboration, authorship, and access become paramount. This article
                     reintroduces affect into the FemTechNet archive through a rooted exploration of
                     the functions of affect in the network. It removes the salience of individual
                     instances of emotional resonance in recognition of archival risks while
                     simultaneously holding the archive of FemTechNet documents to the shared forms
                     of the network.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p6">6</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p6"> Cifor and Wood (2017) have sketched the history of feminist archives as a
                     resistance and an act of telling what has been obscured by power. Where once
                     feminist archives predominantly lingered at the edges of the mainstream, in
                     houses or community archives, they are now increasingly placed within
                     institutions [<a class="ref" href="#cifor2017">Cifor and Wood 2017</a>]. Advocating for feminist engagements
                     with archival theory, Cifor and Wood state that “addressing hierarchical structures and bureaucratic
                     models of organization explicitly has remained relatively
                     under-theorized. The investment in hierarchy cannot simply be understood
                     as an adherence to rationality, it is a means of creating social
                     relations”
                      [<a class="ref" href="#cifor2017">Cifor and Wood 2017</a>, 19]. In the case of FemTechNet, planning the institutional inclusion of the
                     records of a feminist collective that challenges notions of hierarchy into a
                     bureaucratic system of archives — however dispersed — caused me to intensely
                     reflect on how the access afforded by material resources might be held against
                     the central organizing principles of FemTechNet. What follows is a feminist
                     engagement with the hard edges and sharp drops found through the now-dormant
                     effort to maintain a digital record outside of the collective where it was
                     formed.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p7">7</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p7">Through my own reflections and interviews with FemTechNet members, I attempt to
                     determine if it is possible to align the institutionally held digital archive
                     with the principles and goals of FemTechNet and to illustrate the feminist
                     potential that exists even in a navigation of institutions. Archives may be
                     framed through their creators and curators by walking along particular feminist
                     trajectories that are concerned with meaning, affect, loss and (the failures and
                     successes of) intention [<a class="ref" href="#hedstrom2002">Hedstrom 2002</a>]. Archivists and users of
                     the archive should “place not only the records they deal with in context —
                     but also ... place archivists, archival practice, and archival
                     institutions in an equally dynamic context”
                      [<a class="ref" href="#hedstrom2002">Hedstrom 2002</a>, 42] and “such traces of self-conscious archival activities would
                     provide a lens through which the users could read and interpret the
                     evidence left behind”
                      [<a class="ref" href="#hedstrom2002">Hedstrom 2002</a>, 43]. Following Hedstrom, this document will serve to change the meaning and
                     possible interpretations of the academic institutional archive of FemTechNet
                     records. It inserts affect into the archive at a distance, reiterating the role
                     of affect in non-hierarchical feminist organizing as a process — but at a remove
                     that intends to lessen the danger of revelation. Ultimately, it challenges a
                     narrative of archival invisibility as loss or absence and archival visibility as
                     straightforward evidence or easily discernable fact.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Methodology</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p8">8</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p8">The following research occurred in two parts. The first section, “Shaping the Archive,” contains my personal reflections
                     on the process of creating descriptive data for four years of FemTechNet records
                     that were originally included in a collectively maintained Google drive. Using
                     the lens of FemTechNet’s values as outlined in their <em class="emph">Manifesto</em>, I
                     reflect on themes raised as through my engagement with FemTechNet records. The
                     second section, “Approaching the Archive”, includes
                     analysis of open-ended interviews with fourteen FemTechNet collective members
                     who self-selected to be interviewed.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p9">9</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p9">The interview process was explicitly feminist and informed by feminist
                     ethnography [<a class="ref" href="#davis2011">Davis and Craven 2011</a>], as was the analysis of interview
                     content, which occurred through Charmaz’ [<a class="ref" href="#charmaz2006">Charmaz 2006</a>]
                     contextualized grounded theory approach, which follows from Glaser and Strauss
                     [<a class="ref" href="#glaser1967">Glaser and Strauss 1967</a>] . Charmaz’ model integrates the understandings
                     of power in shaping possibilities for disclosure and other acts [<a class="ref" href="#charmaz2006">Charmaz 2006</a>]. Power and contexts were incorporated into the
                     research through questions that directly addressed interviewees’ views on
                     institutions and institutionalization of the archive. Analysis of the interviews
                     provides a greater understanding of the roles of institutions in the archive and
                     overall functioning of the collective, how affect informed the network, and
                     collective members’ own perceptions of what can or ought to be made visible
                     (and, conversely, kept invisible) in the archive.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Shaping the Archive</h1>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">Durable forms</h2>
                     
                     <blockquote>
                        <p class="ptext">
                           “I suppose because I love you, I
                           want to hold onto you in some durable form like an archive.”
                           - Irish, in an exploration of how and in what ways a digital archive may
                           continue the intents of the FemTechNet collective.
                            [<a class="ref" href="#irish2016">Irish 2016</a>]
                           
                        </p>
                     </blockquote>
                     
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p10">10</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p10">As is the case with traditional archives, the creation of descriptive data
                        for FemTechNet materials involved engagement with minutiae. In the early
                        process of determining what held value, I found myself lingering in the
                        descriptive acts of differences between receipts and of contracts negotiated
                        and then withdrawn or modified. FemTechNet’s ephemera spoke to meeting
                        institutional requirements for legitimacy through adherence to demands and
                        policies. The records of the collective illustrate its position as an
                        extension of the universities where its operations occurred. The evidence of
                        the labor involved in meeting institutional demands amplified as the
                        collective’s records and resources — its “homes” — moved
                        from institution to institution. The records reflected the varying
                        requirements of one university against another, illustrating the differences
                        among institutions and their expectations for
                        “legitimate” undertakings. Through a feminist lens,
                        these records revealed the requirements of various academic institutions and
                        the hidden labor entailed in meeting those requirements.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p11">11</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p11">The procession of mundane and hidden acts affirms how little trust exists
                        between institutions and those who endure them as an aspect of loving the
                        subversive or fledgling project or possibility. Receipts or dropped
                        communications or unfinished grant applications are evidence of the
                        difficulty created by institutions, even as FemTechNet was overseen by a
                        group of widely recognized and respected intellectuals within and outside of
                        academia. Records that exist as a response to institutional demands are
                        reminders of affiliation as a process of seeking — validation, funding,
                        legitimacy, recognition. They highlight the ongoing role of a neoliberal
                        university to produce workers who continue the status quo of late
                        capitalism, and its position as accountable to (the idea of) a public that
                        does not view knowledge, in and of itself, as a productive activity.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p12">12</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p12">An archive allows, potentially, for its users to learn and unveil the
                        relationship between collective members and to trace the spaces of care and
                        solace that form in the midst of a university. Emphasizing the affective and
                        affectively feminist dimensions within the archive of FemTechNet acts as a
                        criticism of the neoliberal ideologies that shape academic institutions [<a class="ref" href="#cifor2016">Cifor 2016</a>]. Building from Cvetokvich’s archive of feelings,
                        Cifor posits that the inclusion of affect “is necessary in order to trouble dominant power
                        relations and adequately reflect the lives and meet the needs of the
                        diverse communities that archivists document and serve”
                         [<a class="ref" href="#cifor2016">Cifor 2016</a>, 18]. FemTechNet records provide evidence of the demand for academic
                        products and of the repeated steps to meet the demands of the affiliate or
                        granting body. The affect hidden here is a dragging, a tedium, an attention
                        to detail that is forever shaped by the ways power and material access
                        create and abruptly curtail the possibility of critical pursuits.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p13">13</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p13">The dynamic archives envisioned by Irish [<a class="ref" href="#irish2016">Irish 2016</a>]
                        contrasted heavily with the materials for which I created descriptive
                        information. While I did not often consider how the archive of FemTechNet
                        born-digital documents might sit in relation to other collections within its
                        academic institutional home, the idea of the univeristy as a
                        “home” subtly changed the shape of my description
                        [<a class="ref" href="#eichhorn2014">Eichhorn 2014</a>]. My own assumptions of “archival proximity” — between contrasting
                        collections, between individual objects within the FemTechNet collection —
                        influenced my descriptions [<a class="ref" href="#eichhorn2014">Eichhorn 2014</a>, 232]. Despite
                        a drift to appear objective and professional, the records’ descriptions
                        contain potent but latent affective aspects. There is a possibility that, in
                        cleaning up the archive — erasing duplicates or near duplicates, organizing
                        the messiness of fervor and desire (and limited resources) — the affective
                        links become obscured or broken.
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">Obscured affect</h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p14">14</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p14">In other instances, the loss of affect is challenged through the experiences
                        and recordings of those who lived, saw, enacted, understood, cried about,
                        were hurt by, or otherwise felt the actual impact of events. This is what
                        the archive seems to continually lose and loose — and any researcher who
                        wishes to explore the affective dimensions of FemTechNet, a decidedly
                        feminist project, may find that affect is only inferred by changes of
                        direction, by the frequency of co-publishing, or the (possibly) inaccurate
                        measure of a facial expression or tone of voice. These exist, for the most
                        part, in the imaginary of the collective’s archive.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p15">15</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p15">The imagined permeates archival existence [<a class="ref" href="#gilliland2016">Gilliland and Caswell 2016</a>]. The
                        desire for affect and evidence is a carrying forth of a particular feminist
                        tradition of engaging silences. Part of the feminist archival project is to “envision new ways that archival description,
                        retrieval, and use can be reworked to take absences — and their
                        attending affects — into account”
                         [<a class="ref" href="#gilliland2016">Gilliland and Caswell 2016</a>, 73]. This project may also entail an uncovering of where affect acts as
                        absence — either through the creation of descriptive information, the
                        privileging of particular topics, or through the individual or collective
                        omission of affective experiences. In short, the archive matters, but the
                        archive, and its creators, could always be lying, withholding, hiding
                        something.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p16">16</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p16">There are many reasons to lie, to withhold, to hold multiple locations at
                        once, only allowing some of them to come into focus. Research on trans-
                        feminist and queer (both “LGBTQ” and strange) archives
                        has engaged with the functions of intentional silences [<a class="ref" href="#cowan2018">Cowan 2018</a>]. Shotwell, in a discussion of women’s positions
                        formed by the early definitions of AIDS, explains that feelings of failed
                        memory and of omission may have occurred because they are “experiences as a past from the point of view of an
                        unexpected future”
                         [<a class="ref" href="#shotwell2016">Shotwell 2016</a>, 65]. The archive may undo the linear aspects of time in its holding of
                        recollection and materials that were actively erased through institutional
                        acts.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p17">17</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p17">Archivists, the keepers of information, are responsible for futures in which
                        information is more available or absences are more descriptively defined.
                        Lee outlines this in relation to Berlant’s conceptions of what belongs or
                        becomes acceptable as a discourse of nationalism alongside Gordon’s ideas of
                        ghostly encounters [<a class="ref" href="#lee2017">Lee 2017</a>]. Here, the silence, the absence,
                        is a haunting. Haunting, memory, and rupture are situated in the spaces
                        between and relationships within the archival collection. For users of the
                        FemTechNet archive, encounters informed by knowledge of the organizing
                        principles of the collective may introduce affect as a haunting absence.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p18">18</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p18">The digital plays a particular role in revealing the loss of affective
                        presence. In digital environments that are often structured through claims
                        to masculinity or calls for competition, a feminist, collective presence
                        challenges the culture. Due to such powerful structures, the feminist
                        archive is an act against historical silences and monolithic narratives.
                        Without adhering to techno-utopian approaches to the digital and with
                        caution toward the method of conveyance as related to the medium of original
                        content [<a class="ref" href="#eichhorn2014">Eichhorn 2014</a>], it is still possible to explore how
                        the digital potentially disrupts silence. By no means available to all, the
                        digital archive may still create new possibilities through intention or
                        serendipity. Withers, while deeply critical of the intentions that sit
                        behind the construction of for-profit archives and short-lived digital
                        projects, explains that “[d]igital metadata can place feminist histories
                        within networks of reference and association that may help to
                        assuage the ephemeral conditions of feminist histories that are
                        often subject to dramatic cycles of recovery and loss”
                         [<a class="ref" href="#withers2017">Withers 2017</a>, 686]. Placing a discussion of the FemTechNet archive alongside projects
                        such as the Women’s Liberation Music Archive described by Withers and the
                        Chicana por mi Raza archive described by Cotera becomes a way of addressing
                        silences, of positioning projects within a frame of reference and an
                        imagined network.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p19">19</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p19">Not all silences and losses are affectively negative. Femerality, for
                        instance, was one of the formative aspects of the FemTechNet collective.
                        FemTechNet members acknowledged the possibility of their own ephemeral
                        engagement with the collective alongside the potential that materials and
                        events would not necessarily have permanence. For FemTechNet the concept of
                        femerality worked toward an honesty and trust that countered the material
                        record of FemTechNet's interaction with many (but not all) institutional
                        affiliations and records, but did not always reveal how shifts in the
                        collective’s perspective occurred over time. As with other documents of
                        collective projects, “[e]ssential pieces of information, which might
                        answer questions and direct research, are not necessarily tangible
                        or archived”
                         [<a class="ref" href="#ault2013">Ault 2013</a>, 105].
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p20">20</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p20">Digital archival collections can but do not inherently push against the
                        silence and absence that feminists so often seek to highlight. Cotera
                        explores the possibilities of the archive as holding the “discursive power” of history and existence [<a class="ref" href="#cotera2015">Cotera 2015</a>, 784]. The discursive power of the
                        institutional archive can hold multiple meanings. In one, reading the
                        silence and the absence within the archive becomes a tool to work against
                        the historical narrative of hegemonic power. In another, “subaltern knowledges are recovered only to be
                        recirculated as scholarly products that reify the academy’s
                        authoritative status as a site of knowledge production”
                         [<a class="ref" href="#cotera2015">Cotera 2015</a>, 786]. In yet another, feminist <em class="emph">archivista</em> positions reshape
                        the archive into something collaborative, collective, and generative [<a class="ref" href="#cotera2015">Cotera 2015</a>, 796]. Here, the “common becomes a new terrain”
                         [<a class="ref" href="#cotera2015">Cotera 2015</a>, 789]. It is possible that the documentation of collectivity, however
                        unrecorded in its discord and adherence, pushes against individualistic
                        approaches to the institutional archive. The unrecorded then, might act as
                        contrast.
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">Risking permanence</h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p21">21</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p21">In a discussion of lesbian oral histories, Chenier implicates the archivist
                        as responsible for the the ethical balance between the personal — a history
                        — and the political — a collective meaning achieved through access to these
                        histories [<a class="ref" href="#chenier2015">Chenier 2015</a>]. At sway here are the issues of
                        confidentiality and consent. In a world where the terrain of acceptance or
                        (at minimum) tolerance continues to shift and entail forms of intense
                        retribution (what Chenier describes as “privacy
                        anxieties”) [<a class="ref" href="#chenier2015">Chenier 2015</a>], archivists must respect
                        LGBTQ individuals who dare not be outed by the archive. It is not a far
                        stretch, in this moment, to imagine that the same shifts can, and do, occur
                        across affiliations with feminist projects that seek to undo institutionally
                        systemic forces of racism, sexism, and homophobia while also being located
                        in the middle and interstices of these institutions.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p22">22</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p22">Add to this the knowledge that those with power (be they individuals with
                        class or race privilege or hiring institutions involved in vetting
                        processes) have utilized the digital record against those without power at
                        increasingly alarming rates. The availability of data that can be used to
                        identify members of FemTechNet, even if it is only an associational
                        belonging, can be enough for those who want to invalidate or threaten the
                        work of feminist and anti-racist groups. The methods of data discovery,
                        collection, and dissemination among antagonists has been complex and may
                        mean that silence, while a burden, can also become a refuge from attack —
                        that engaging in feminist or other political projects outside of mainstream
                        recognition and without leaving a trace is a way of seeking protection.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p23">23</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p23">Alternately, the archive offers up the possibility of recognition and
                        encouragement. In utopian formulations the archive serves as a point of
                        recognition and resonance and the archive can be activated in such a way
                        that “in looking back, activists might see innovative
                        ways of intervening in the(ir) present”
                         [<a class="ref" href="#buchanan2015">Buchanan and Bastian 2015</a>, 431]. There is, in the archive, a desire to be “recounted” as well as “open-ended”
                         [<a class="ref" href="#ault2013">Ault 2013</a>, 110]. The archive of FemTechNet records and activities may provide a
                        historical grounding for future feminist projects that broadly grapple with
                        and utilize technologies. Beyond speaking to the possibility of the
                        existence of distributed feminist collectives, the archive may provide
                        background information that allows the next iteration of similar projects to
                        grow from the knowledge developed by FemTechNet.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p24">24</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p24">My own reflections on shaping the archive and its descriptive data are
                        evident in the process of conducting open-ended interviews with members of
                        the FemTechNet collective. While I did not highlight the anxieties I felt or
                        tensions I identified previous to the interview process, I did attend to the
                        topics addressed in this section when collective members brought them to the
                        fore. As the concerns identified herein are relevant to the construction of
                        feminist archival projects, there were often areas of overlap between topics
                        raised by interviewees and those present in the above contemplations.
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Approaching the Archive</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p25">25</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p25">Collective members discussed the possible institutional archive through
                     references to their own positions to the archive (as creators of documents or
                     envisioning themselves as users) and the ways they conceptualized its form. They
                     shared their knowledge of the levels of documentation undertaken by the
                     collective, the infrastructure required for maintaining (existing or possible
                     forms of) documentation, and their hopes and trepidations around the risks and
                     possibilities created by the archive. In thinking through the perilousness of
                     the archive, interviewees imagined the archive in various manifestations,
                     mediating access with recognition of institutional norms around open, closed, or
                     modified points of entry.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p26">26</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p26">FemTechNet members noted that the nature of the collective — distributed, loose,
                     dispersed — necessitated huge amounts of documentation. Documentation was
                     produced through collaborative work, out of institutional requirements and an
                     urge to archive “kind of compulsively.” Recognizing
                     that the infrastructure that exists within an institutional archive was part of
                     the appeal of holding materials therein. In considering the extent of
                     documentation produced within FemTechNet, interviewees emphasized the resources
                     provided by an institutional archive as surpassing what collective members, who
                     voluntarily contributed labor to the project, could provide. Members variously
                     mentioned the need for maintenance of digital materials, for their cataloging,
                     tagging, and grouping, and expressed desire for an archive that extended “beyond the memory of members.” The institutional
                     digital archive was appealing due to the “paltry
                     possibilities in a neoliberal university” — it was the
                     “lesser evil.” This held true even as collective members
                     placed their trust in Irish as a decision-maker around the archive, and as they
                     acknowledged the professional nature of archive employees (one interviewee, in
                     particular, noted being “at some kind of peace and security
                     that boisterous, sometimes out of control representation of the many, many
                     things we did are being handled by professionals”).
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p27">27</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p27">FemTechNet members described the differences in archives and institutional
                     ideologies as they compared an institutional university archive to other forms
                     of preservation. The “culture and power dynamics” of
                     individual institutions were seen as shaping how much control FemTechNet might
                     retain over the institutional archive as well as where and how FemTechNet
                     materials might be located and described. Interviewees particularly noted the
                     loss of power and control that might happen once records fell under
                     institutional purview. In this line of thought, one interviewee noted the
                     benefit an institution might receive for being known as a host of the
                     FemTechNet, asking “how is it possible to create an actual
                     relationship with the institutions?”
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p28">28</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p28">In imagining the institutional digital archive of FemTechNet materials,
                     collective members differed in their line of pragmatism. One member expressed
                     desire for a “living archive, dynamic archive.”
                     Others noted that this archive might be shaped by how it is used and known
                     through the trails and vestiges of users, possibly restructured through its use
                     in the creation and shift of “folders, hierarchies”
                     and tagging. Another noted that capturing the processes of women’s work is part
                     of “keeping a lineage of feminist work in the academy and in
                     technology specifically,” highlighting the erasure of women in
                     archival spaces. Others made comparisons against less appealing possible forms
                     of the archive. In one instance, the present distributed shape of FemTechNet
                     records (many of which are held at the individual institutions that formerly
                     acted as “home” for the collective’s records) was a driving
                     force in desiring an amalgamated institutional archive. In another,
                     institutional digital archives were compared to less desirable corporate,
                     for-profit ventures, such as YouTube. From this visage point, the institutional
                     archive held an appeal beyond resources and structure.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p29">29</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p29">The complexity of technologies used for meetings and collaborative projects
                     influenced how and in what shape materials were made to be included in the
                     archive. The level of caution described by interviewees around archiving
                     particular modes of communication (such as the Bluejeans video conferencing
                     platform) must be understood in relation to the level of intimacy these
                     technologies facilitated among collective members. Bluejeans, a collaborative
                     tool that utilizes video, voice, and chat, was repeatedly mentioned in reference
                     not only to impossible infrastructural demands (if kept as records, the size of
                     these files would surpass the capacity of FemTechNet to retain the meetings as
                     recordings) but also as facilitating togetherness and forms of personal exchange
                     that were intentionally kept out of any possible, even internal, archive.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p30">30</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p30">Interviewees differed on their conceptualizations of the archive, based in their
                     positions on the need for caution and for access. For some, it was “incredibly important to archive the work” in light of
                     “the scariness of things disappearing.” For
                     others, the stability of the digital form had to be held in tension with the
                     ephemeral conditions (such as a Bluejeans meeting) that were part of
                     FemTechNet’s becoming. Others considered the possibilities for harm given
                     various forms the archive might take — limiting access versus a more complete
                     archive (“if we wanted a complete archive.... that kind of
                     thing I wouldn’t want anyone to see for – 50 years!”). Interviewee’s
                     conceptualizations also involved accounting for ownership — asking whether or
                     not materials collectively (and at times, anonymously) created belonged to their
                     individual creators or to the collective in its present iteration. This was
                     especially sticky considering that “almost
                     everything” was “collaborative or anonymous —
                     DELIBERATELY decentering the individual”.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p31">31</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p31">Creation, control, and the public face of FemTechNet brought to light issues of
                     trace and provenance, which compounded the privately shared forms of affective
                     belonging that members valued within the collective. Member’s concerns informed
                     how records were produced and made available within the collective as a whole,
                     as well as what materials were intentionally absent in the archive. Records of
                     affect were at times viewed by interviewees as a liability, a necessary absence
                     in the records. As one member stated, “commitments to
                     feminist structure eliminate the inclusion of affect in documents.”
                     Due to the requirements of professionalism and in recognition of the negative
                     interpretations of affect as indicative of professional failure, records were
                     often intentionally void of emotional cadence or were not placed into the
                     collective records of FemTechNet. Even when kept, the records could be “very partial, very weird ... reconstructed from the missing
                     pieces for people who were there” but not for outsiders. Others
                     approached the tension of control and creation with a perspective of collective
                     well-being and continuation, pointing to the ongoing processes in which
                     FemTechNet is involved, including grant writing. For these individuals, the time
                     of creation of the archive existed as a question of ethics – it was “hasty” to hold materials in the archive while members
                     were still in the process of the work.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p32">32</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p32">Not all members discussed a proactive creation of archival absence of their
                     personal lives or feelings. However, it was in mentioning these traces that
                     interviewees were most likely to raise concerns of privacy and personal safety
                     and to imagine multiple approaches to the use of the institutional digital
                     archive of FemTechNet materials. Individual precarity in relation to
                     institutions (adjunct or pre-tenure teaching) was a condition that
                     pre-determined what fell out of the existing archive. For example, due to their
                     individual nature, the mentorship of tenured faculty and letters of support did
                     not exist in the archive of the collective. Precariousness in institutions was
                     not always directly related to position, it also was influenced by whether or
                     not individuals encountered sympathetic colleagues or departmental support at
                     their individual institutions. Closing the archive was viewed as a protective
                     move in light of that precarity.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p33">33</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p33">Some interviewees noted that some documents maintained by FemTechNet were
                     generated without any intention of archiving (“we haven’t
                     been taking notes and writing in these personal, decoupled ways”).
                     The dangerousness of these records being made public was due to the
                     institutionally maintained division of professionalism and affect. Affective
                     absence was at times viewed as necessity, with faith that individuals who
                     encountered the archive (given possible constraints on access) would know that
                     “quiet isn't silence, things that you don’t see doesn’t
                     mean it is not happening — we know things that don’t go in public records...
                     and that’s okay”.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p34">34</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p34">Ethical concerns, especially those around safety, informed the various
                     manifestations of access and engagement that FemTechNet members envisioned in
                     the archive. Risk was almost always held in tension with the “need to be preserved” and the possibility of creating a
                     lineage that could inspire and inform other, possibly similar, feminist
                     collectives. Others expressed hope for an open review period (within the
                     network) of all items that might eventually be placed in the institutional
                     archive. A range of restrictive procedures were envisioned during the
                     interviews, from closing the archives for a number of years to placing
                     requirements on any researchers to go through ethnographic training in light of
                     the collective nature of the archive. In this iteration, the researcher would be
                     required by the institution to acknowledge provenance and gain permission from
                     creators of any given material. Even if these restrictions and guarantees were
                     in place, there was acknowledgement among the members that there would be issues
                     of digital security inherent in the archive. Placing the archive in an academic
                     institution could lead to loppholes in restricted access through FOIA requests
                     and other such mechanism that would lead to a lack of control over the
                     information contained therein.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p35">35</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p35">To this end, interviewees tended to present three possible forms of use of the
                     archive. In the first, there was the possibility of an institutional archive
                     that was primarily utilized by and maintained for FemTechNet members. In this
                     form, the distributed materials produced by FemTechNet were co-located and easy
                     to access. Interviewees often recounted their own difficulties with finding past
                     information or being barred by institutional walls (in instances where an
                     institution had held FemTechNet materials but the collective member had moved
                     away from the institution). For members who took this approach, the archive was
                     envisioned as an aspect of the ongoing work of FemTechNet.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p36">36</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p36">In the second imagined form, the archive was externally accessible. Interviewees
                     who discussed external access mentioned the possibilities of other projects,
                     expressing a desire for the archive to contain “the material
                     that moves forward other initiatives.” Others noted that an
                     externally accessible archive entails a broad range of users. An externally
                     accessible archive might create access “into
                     perpetuity” for people “who aren’t necessarily
                     sensitive to the goals of FemTechNet.” A few interviewees felt a high
                     degree of discomfort and anxiety when imagining this type of accessible
                     archive.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p37">37</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p37">In the third form, collective members openly acknowledged the heightened risk of
                     having an institutionalized archive — that beyond the possibility of the
                     research being used incorrectly, information in the archive, including
                     affectively revelatory information, could be put to nefarious use. This line of
                     thought was situated in FemTechNet’s own history — one that had been formed
                     during intense manifestations of “toxic digital
                     misogyny” and racism. Fears of being targeted by hate groups, far
                     right zealots, and others with cruel intentions created wariness around the
                     overall project of the archive. Interviewees’ fears related to the mediated
                     professional public faces that institutional placements required of FemTechNet
                     members.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">Institutional sway</h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p38">38</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p38">FemTechNet was and is still shaped by institutional forces. It was
                        established to create publicly untraceable links, specifically through a
                        redistribution (“pool”ing) of the power held by respected
                        academic feminists through mentorship, networks of support letters to
                        institutions for job placements, and material resources. In thinking of
                        institutional sways over the shape of the collective (sways that are often
                        passingly present in the documents in the archive), interviewees discussed
                        the importance of leveraging resources and maintaining a collective
                        formation that, while dispersed, continued to be composed of and encouraged
                        prestigious feminist technological engagement. Resources defined the
                        possibilities available to the collective not only in relation to grant
                        seeking (and the “structural challenges” caused
                        because many granting bodies “explicitly forbid
                        political advocacy”) but also general funding.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p39">39</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p39">Interviewees indicated the fraught nature of creating feminist work through
                        the resources of the institution. In their implementation of feminist
                        practices that often ran a hard counter to institutional logics, they made
                        active decisions not to “play by the rules.”
                        Given the feminist disruption of the university as a goal, they also noted
                        specific points where institutions benefitted from the incorporation of
                        FemTechNet courses or materials, which were often brought into being through
                        massive amounts of hidden labor. Much of the evidence of FemTechNet, its
                        public face, depended on energetic devotions often unseen, unacknowledged,
                        and even derided within institutions; these “devotions” were performed as a “third or
                        fourth job” or unwaged labor. Alongside generating cultural
                        standing for institutions through concealed work, members in institutional
                        placements were also subject to the schedules and bureaucratic buttresses of
                        institutional requirements. Interviewees were forced to work outside of an
                        affective, reactive, and feminist time frame and instead function in the
                        slow pull of academic rationality.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p40">40</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p40">When prompted, interviewees noted the intense institutional requirements that
                        called for the minutiae I described in preparing the archive for
                        institutionalization as part of the work of redistribution of resources
                        throughout FemTechNet (one stated that minutiae is “very
                        live” in the process of the work). Others noted proactive
                        documentation as survival strategy, an acknowledgement that FemTechNet, as a
                        collective, flows in, out, and around institutional requirements. Individual
                        institutional affiliations shaped how information was created and
                        maintained, and often information was lost when individuals changed
                        positions. The work of creating and maintaining documentation was also
                        discussed in relation to precarity, specifically that of adjunct and
                        untenured members of the collective. Redistributing power entailed
                        redistributing the more grueling tasks of accounting for the collective, and
                        several interviewees spoke of the attempt to balance their own positions of
                        holding power and having academic security by securing institutional
                        resources.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p41">41</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p41">For all of the institutional requirements that adhere in the FemTechNet
                        archive, members viewed it as an alternative to professional associations
                        and other academically-based projects. Its appeal lay in how it gave space
                        for “ambivalent/ambiguous” affective ways that
                        countered the isolating institutional placements in which interviewees found
                        themselves. Collective members repeatedly brought up the Allied Media
                        Conference and activist approaches to organizing as possible new forms for
                        the collective. Among the reasons for a shifting toward activist approaches
                        were an undoing of hierarchies of institutional prestige, the incorporation
                        of activist ethics, and a “distrust of institutions in
                        [the] neoliberal model.”
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">Affect and trace</h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p42">42</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p42">Affect was a salient feature in how interviewees described the collective.
                        Even though affect was intentionally flattened in the records that form the
                        archive, there would be no documentation without the affective resonances
                        that drew members to the network. Affective features of the network were
                        described in its countering professionalism and professional isolation, as a
                        motivator for continuing the work of FemTechNet, and as consistently, though
                        ephemerally, enacted and informed feminist practice.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p43">43</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p43">Interviewees noted the danger of documenting affect not only in its inherent
                        vulnerability but also in light of the institutionally created binary
                        between professionalism and emotional expression. Interviews often described
                        FemTechNet in comparison to institutional professionalism through statements
                        that “when you are in academia you are always in a
                        competitive environment ... I don't spend a lot of time with these folks
                        but there's a sense of support.” They noted that “productivity comes second” (to well-being) in the
                        efforts of the collective, and that the effort undertaken to make contact
                        and to observe others’ affective states could not be captured in
                        documentation and could be professionally deleterious for more precarious
                        members if it were available.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p44">44</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p44">The draw of the network was, for many, this affective resonance. It was
                        desirable for what it represented — a feminist ethos that many members
                        shared prior to their decision to join FemTechNet. It offered an alternative
                        to “feelings of isolation common around feminist
                        scholars.” Several interviewees, in discussing their personal
                        relationships to institutions, noted feeling alone and that it was “very significant having colleagues.” FemTechNet met
                        a lack that many interviewees experienced in affectively repressive
                        institutional environments.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p45">45</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p45">Affective salience was also part of what kept individuals in the network.
                        FemTechNet’s position as a “very open space to emotion
                        and interpersonal attention” provided a respite from often
                        spiritually crushing institutional placements (one interviewee noted that it
                        allowed her to “continue to work in institutional
                        locations... instead of feeling like dying all the time.”) The
                        value of affective ties within the network surpassed the personal costs of
                        often unpaid labor. Within their personal relationships that were
                        facilitated by the collective, members could admit that, despite their best
                        intentions, they were exhausted by the movement between professional and
                        other realms. Relationships with other FemTechNet members provided forums to
                        admit feelings of being drained by the requirement to be driven by personal
                        passion in the production of FemTechNet materials or the emotional weight of
                        affectively saturated interactions with students. Interviewees expressed the
                        marginalization they experience in their institutional placements in
                        opposition to the joy, sorrow, and complexity they moved through and
                        co-created with FemTechNet friends and colleagues. They had weathered storms
                        with other collective members — “FemTechNet: We cry
                        together” — and learned the subtle nuances of each others’ moods
                        and humors. The strength of affective bonds was clear through descriptions —
                        “we love each other,”
                        “it was always the thing — no one could believe they
                        were going to the meeting and then halfway through — joy.” These
                        bonds were not always pleasant — they involved forgiveness, patience, and an
                        acknowledgement of tension. They were also, ultimately, productive in
                        illustrating the goal and intentions of the overall network, in meticulously
                        crafted and anonymously published materials, and in the “astonishment, joy... the affectual nature” of research
                        itself.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p46">46</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p46">Affect was everpresent and elusive, even beyond interviewees’ descriptions of
                        active forces as motivators for joining and continuing in the collective.
                        While the processes of affective efforts were most present in the check-ins
                        at the beginnings of meetings, statements about FemTechNet were almost
                        always followed by descriptions of the ephemeral encounter. At times,
                        attempts to retain and foster that ephemerality meant that recording
                        Bluejeans meetings might lessen the likelihood that people were open with
                        one another when they met. Adding to the passing nature of check-ins were
                        accounts of the raucous face-to-face encounters — encounters that, at times,
                        took place after years of virtual interaction and co-production. In person
                        encounters allowed for deeper connections between members and gave (for some
                        interviewees) a sense of depth and reality to on-line meetings.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p47">47</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p47">The introduction of new technologies and new uses of technologies were noted
                        as increasing the affective ties within FemTechNet. Bluejeans (a video and
                        chat platform) was one of the ways institutional ties could be leveraged for
                        the (affective) purposes of the network. Within Bluejeans meetings, several
                        types of communications occurred — from spoken to chat to gestural — with
                        people performing in the medium in particular ways. For instance, one
                        interviewee noted several people who in the chat are “really funny... riff off of what people are saying out loud.”
                        Another noted that affective relationships to technology — proclivities
                        toward, avoidance of — shaped the nature of affective relationships between
                        individuals in the network. In this description, newly introduced
                        technologies were shaped by their use (and misuse) and subsequently shaped
                        instantiations of the network. Implied and collectively held understanding
                        of specific virtual platforms (such as Facebook groups) and technologies
                        also shaped how, if ever, individuals interacted with one another.
                        FemTechNet participants were not perceived as understanding they were
                        contributing to an archive; it would be unethical, ultimately, to include
                        their contributions, despite the exchanges (on Facebook, for example) taking
                        place on what is often viewed as a “democratic space” and through
                        another lens as “ultimately proprietary”.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p48">48</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p48">New technologies were noted as increasing the playfulness within the network.
                        Highlighted here were .gif parties — a kind of technologically enhanced
                        hanging out. Bluejeans, specifically, was noted for the level of intimate
                        knowledge it facilitated. With video chat, meeting attendees witnessed one
                        another’s body language, modes of speech, and more. One interviewee, in
                        describing the scope of this disclosure, noted seeing “rooms, kids, pets, partners, some of our members at conferences, on
                        buses.” The platform allowed individuals who often had strong
                        affective ties prior to its use within the collective to suddenly encounter
                        one another in lived, though spatially distant, contexts. This level of
                        knowledge, as one interviewee stated, gives “testament
                        to all the things that hadn’t been recorded and couldn’t be
                        recorded”: the necessity of affective absence, of many forms of
                        quiet, in the archive.
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">Internal shifts toward critical race theories</h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p49">49</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p49">The emphasis FemTechNet placed on articulating critical approaches to race
                        brought about an internal, though unrecorded, shift to address racism within
                        the collective. A few of the interviewees mentioned racism and awareness of
                        power dynamics in their reflections on FemTechNet. For some, working against
                        racism heightened their sense of being identified or made more precarious
                        through the archive. For others, the ways that research occurred in the
                        academy were tinged with a denial of post-colonial, third world feminist
                        methodologies and the possibility of using these methodologies in FemTechNet
                        was part of the allure of being part of the collective. While a collective
                        member described race and racism as “an issue that came
                        up all the time” (especially in relationship to the inclusivity
                        of the network) the manifestation of power and oppression within the
                        collective were specifically discussed by only two interviewees.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p50">50</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p50">Rather than rupture, interviewees described a long and ongoing process born
                        out of patience and an awareness of others’ familiarity with specific
                        concepts. In practice, the creation of a public face of FemTechNet involved
                        a process of language shifting, of rewriting and editing documents, and of
                        constantly addressing moments in which power (and oppression) inadvertently
                        were reinserted into FemTechNet materials or processes. There was, and is,
                        an ongoing “conversation across difference” that
                        aims to educate from many points. These difficult, ever-vigilant
                        conversations were described in relation to people of color and third world
                        feminism as well as trans feminisms. The ongoing energy for this work, and
                        its impetus, was notably not described as an outcome of FemTechNet. Instead,
                        it rested in the appeal and the possibilities of the network, which was how
                        “people found people they could work with, found the
                        things they needed.”
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Conclusion</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p51">51</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p51">Absences do leave a trace for those who feel them, who recognize a haunting, who
                     know the impossibility of coherence without some affective tug. The interviews
                     with FemTechNet members trouble the idea that absence in the archive always
                     occurs due to erasure, complicating it with the voluntary acts that limit
                     certain records from entering the institution. Voluntarily engaging in silences
                     occurred out of a sense of self-preservation and also as an act of the love that
                     interviewees attest exists within FemTechNet. Selective silence and affective
                     absence in the records of FemTechNet served to protect the individuals composing
                     the network and the network itslef from eaily-predictable harms that might arise
                     if the collective’s records were to be made publicly available. Interviewees
                     described collectively and individually leveraging resources, recognizing
                     precarity, and looking out for one another as an overarching ethos within the
                     collective, made prominent through contrast to the possibly flattened archive of
                     FemTechNet records.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p52">52</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p52">My own reflections, findings in archival research, and the interviews conducted
                     with FemTechNet members reveal that affective absence is not always or solely a
                     direct product of institutionalizing a group’s records. Rather, the
                     institutional affiliations of FemTechNet and its members negated the possibility
                     of affective presence due to possible threats of loss of resources or
                     professional standing. Collective members interviewed in this research shared
                     their awareness of navigating affect within FemTechNet records even prior to the
                     beginning of an extended discussion about archiving their work. In acts of self-
                     and collective-preservation, their absenting of affect from the record was not
                     undertaken to deny the existence of affect as a central tenet of the feminist
                     collective. Instead, it invites the feminist archival user to make assumptions,
                     however imperfect, about how affect connected the network. This article may
                     frame understanding of what users of the archive may (or may not, or cannot)
                     encounter should the FemTechNet archive be made publicly available. In addition
                     to affirming the affective trace that suffuses the space between FemTechNet’s
                     records, it also offers models for understanding how feminist collectives
                     maneuver among and between institutions without becoming subsumed by them.
                     Interviews in this research attest to the possibility that a raucous feminism
                     can be held alongside the effort of meeting institutional demands.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p53">53</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p53">Unseen labor infuses the archive — in the suppression of affect, the records not
                     made or lost, and the effort of documentation required by academic institutions.
                     An interviewee raised that unpaid labor also occurs in this research. The
                     institutional support of FemTechNet, and its limits, meant that the members I
                     interviewed were speaking to me on their own time and out of their own desire
                     for a more informed approach to the archive. While anonymity does potentially
                     shield individuals from nefarious readers (for these exist alongside the
                     possible nefarious users of the archive), it does not and cannot give them the
                     credit for the work they so fully deserve. That credit then, as with the
                     anonymously authored documents produced by FemTechNet, will have to be
                     distributed throughout the network.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p54">54</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p54">Future research might explore how collectives such as FemTechNet move from
                     institutional models to collaborative, activist instantiations. Looking to, for
                     instance, other groups that straddle the professional and institutional demands
                     of academia and their own wild and unruly goals may provide better models for
                     doing just that. Then again, it may be better, for all who flauntingly move
                     within as well as outside of institutions, that it is enough just to encounter
                     the hint that others also do this, have also done it, continue to do it
                     still.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
               
            </div>
            
            <div id="notes">
               <h2>Notes</h2>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e224"><span class="noteRef lang en">[1] The
                     collective ultimately decided not to place their archive in an institutional
                     setting during the time between conducting this research (fall of 2017) and
                     the publication of this article.</span></div>
            </div>
            <div id="worksCited">
               <h2>Works Cited</h2>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="ault2013">
                     <!-- close -->Ault 2013</span> Ault, J. “Active
                  Recollection: Archiving Group Material.” In S. Hebert and A. S.
                  Karlsen (eds.) <cite class="title italic">Self Organized, London and Bergen</cite>,
                  NO (2013), pp. 102-12.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="balsamo2013">
                     <!-- close -->Balsamo et al 2013</span> Balsamo, A., Leeson, L. H.,
                  and Rich, B. R. “Video Dialogue: Feminism, Technology, and
                  Archive” (2013). Retrieved from: <a href="https://player.vimeo.com/video/80233697" onclick="window.open('https://player.vimeo.com/video/80233697'); return false" class="ref">https://player.vimeo.com/video/80233697</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="buchanan2015">
                     <!-- close -->Buchanan and Bastian 2015</span> Buchanan, A. and
                  Bastian, M. “Activating the Archive: Rethinking the Role of
                  Traditional Archives for Local Activist Projects”, <cite class="title italic">Archival Science</cite>, 15 (2015): 429-451.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="charmaz2006">
                     <!-- close -->Charmaz 2006</span> Charmaz, K. <cite class="title italic">Constructing Grounded Theory</cite>. Sage, London (2006).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="chenier2015">
                     <!-- close -->Chenier 2015</span> Chenier, E. “Privacy Anxieties: Ethics Versus Activism in Archiving”, <cite class="title italic">Radical History Review,</cite> 122 (2015): 129-41.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="cifor2016">
                     <!-- close -->Cifor 2016</span> Cifor, M. “Affecting
                  Relations: Introducing Affect Theory”, <cite class="title italic">Archival
                     Science,</cite> 16 (2016): 7-31.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="cifor2017">
                     <!-- close -->Cifor and Wood 2017</span> Cifor, M. and Wood S. “Critical Feminism in the Archives”, <cite class="title italic">Journal of Critical Library and Information Studies</cite>
                  1.2 (2017).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="cotera2015">
                     <!-- close -->Cotera 2015</span> Cotera, M. “‘Invisiblity is an Unnatural Disaster’: Feminist archival praxis
                  after the digital turn”, <cite class="title italic">South Atlantic
                     Quarterly</cite>, 114.4 (2015): 781-801.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="cowan2018">
                     <!-- close -->Cowan 2018</span> Cowan, T. L. “Internet of Bawdies: Transmedial drag and the onlining of trans-feminist
                  and queer performance archives, a Workshop Essay”, <cite class="title italic">First Monday</cite> 23.7
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="davis2011">
                     <!-- close -->Davis and Craven 2011</span> Davis, D-A and Craven, C.
                  “Revisiting Feminist Ethnography: Methods and Activism
                  at the Intersection of Neoliberal Policy”, <cite class="title italic">Feminist Formations,</cite> 23.2 (2011): 190-208.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="eichhorn2014">
                     <!-- close -->Eichhorn 2014</span> Eichhorn, K. “Beyond Digitisation: A Case Study of Three Contemporary Feminist
                  Collections”, <cite class="title italic">Archives and Manuscripts</cite>,
                  42.3 (2014): 227-37.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="femtechnet2014">
                     <!-- close -->FemTechNet 2014</span>  FemTechNet. “Manifesto”. 2014. Retrieved from: <a href="https://femtechnet.org/publications/manifesto/" onclick="window.open('https://femtechnet.org/publications/manifesto/'); return false" class="ref">https://femtechnet.org/publications/manifesto/</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="gilliland2016">
                     <!-- close -->Gilliland and Caswell 2016</span> Gilliland, A. J. and
                  Caswell, “Records and Their Imaginaries: Imagining the
                  Impossible, Making Possible the Imagined”, <cite class="title italic">Archival Science</cite>, 16 (2016): 53-75.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="glaser1967">
                     <!-- close -->Glaser and Strauss 1967</span> Glaser, B. G., and
                  Strauss, A. L. <cite class="title italic">The Discovery of Grounded Theory: Strategies
                     for Qualitative Research</cite>. Adline Publishing, Chicago (1967).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="hedstrom2002">
                     <!-- close -->Hedstrom 2002</span> Hedstrom, M. “Archives, Memory, and Interfaces with the Past”, <cite class="title italic">Archival Science</cite>, 2 (2002): 21-43.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="irish2016">
                     <!-- close -->Irish 2016</span> Irish, S. “Archiving
                  a Network, Networking an Archive”, <cite class="title italic">Lady
                     Justice/New Criticals</cite> (2016). Retrieved from: <a href="http://www.newcriticals.com/archiving-a-network-networking-an-archive" onclick="window.open('http://www.newcriticals.com/archiving-a-network-networking-an-archive'); return false" class="ref">http://www.newcriticals.com/archiving-a-network-networking-an-archive</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="juhasz2012">
                     <!-- close -->Juhasz and Balsamo 2012</span> Juhasz, A. and Balsamo, A.
                  “An Idea Whose Time is Here: FemTechNet — A Distributed
                  Online Collaborative Course (DOCC)”. <cite class="title italic">Ada: A
                     Journal of Gender, New Media, and Technology</cite>, (2012).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="lee2017">
                     <!-- close -->Lee 2017</span> Lee, J. A. “Beyond
                  Pillars of Evidence: Exploring the Shaky Ground of Queer/ed Archives and
                  Their Methodologies”. In A. J. Gilliland, S. McKemmish and A. J. Lau
                  (eds.), <cite class="title italic">Research in the Archival Multiverse</cite> ,
                  Monash University Publishing, Clayton, Victoria (2017), pp. 324-51.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="losh2016">
                     <!-- close -->Losh 2016</span> Losh, E. “Together
                  Apart: FemTechNet and Feminist Online Collectives”, <cite class="title italic">Camera Obscura: Feminism, Culture, and Media Studies</cite>,
                  31.3 (2016): 133-39.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="shotwell2016">
                     <!-- close -->Shotwell 2016</span> Shotwell, A. “Women Don’t Get AIDS, They Just Die From It.” In <cite class="title italic">Against Purity: Living Ethically in Compromised Times</cite>,
                  University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis (2016), pp. 55-74.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="theimer2012">
                     <!-- close -->Theimer 2012</span> Theimer, K. “Archives in Context and as Context”, <cite class="title italic">Journal of
                     Humanities</cite>, 1.2 (2012).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="wernimont2015">
                     <!-- close -->Wernimont 2015</span> Wernimont, J. “Introduction to Feminisms and DH special issue”, <cite class="title italic">DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly</cite>, 9.2 (2015).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="withers2017">
                     <!-- close -->Withers 2017</span> Withers, D. “Ephemeral Feminist Histories and the Politics of Transmission within
                  Digital Culture”, <cite class="title italic">Women's History
                     Review</cite>, 26.5 (2017): 678-691.
               </div>
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar"><a href="#">Preview</a>  |  <span style="color: grey">XML</span> |  <a href="#" onclick="javascript:window.print();" title="Click for print friendly version">Print Article</a></div>
         </div>
      </div>
   </body>
</html>