<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
      <title>[PREVIEW] DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly: </title>
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_screen.css" media="screen" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_print.css" media="print" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" /><style type="text/css">
        #mainContent {
          float: none;
          padding-top: 2em;
          padding-left: 4em;
          padding-right: 4em;
          margin-left: 225px;
           
        }</style></head>
   <body>
      <div id="mainContent">
         <div xmlns:dhqBiblio="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/ns/biblio" class="DHQarticle">
            <div id="pubInfo">Preview<br />Volume 009 Number 
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar">
               <form id="taporware" action="get">
                  <div><a href="/dhq/preview/index.html">Preview</a>
                      | 
                     <a rel="external" href="/dhq/vol/9//000193.xml">XML</a>
                     
                     | 
                     		   Discuss
                     			(<a href="/dhq/vol/9//000193/000193.html#disqus_thread" data-disqus-identifier="000193">
                        				Comments
                        			</a>)
                     
                  </div>
               </form>
            </div>
            
            <div class="DHQheader">
               
               
               
               <h1 class="articleTitle">Intermediality and Cultural Assessment: A Review of <cite class="title italic">Digital Humanities and the Study of Intermediality in Comparative
                     Cultural Studies</cite>, edited by Steven Tötösy de Zepetnek. Purdue Scholarly
                  Publishing Services, 2013, 375 pp. 
               </h1>
               
               <div class="author"><span style="color: grey">Isabel Pinto</span> &lt;<a href="mailto:vilhalpandos_at_hotmail_dot_com" onclick="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('vilhalpandos_at_hotmail_dot_com'); return false;" onkeypress="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('vilhalpandos_at_hotmail_dot_com'); return false;">vilhalpandos_at_hotmail_dot_com</a>&gt;, Research Centre for Communication and Culture from the Catholic
                  University of Portugal
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               <span class="Z3988" title="url_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;rft_val_fmt=info%3Aofi%2Ffmt%3Akev%3Amtx%3Ajournal&amp;rfr_id=info%3Asid%2Fzotero.org%3A2&amp;rft.genre=article&amp;rft.atitle=Intermediality%20and%20Cultural%20Assessment%3A%20A%20Review%20of%20Digital%20Humanities%20and%20the%20Study%20of%20Intermediality%20in%20Comparative%20Cultural%20Studies,%20edited%20by%20Steven%20Tötösy%20de%20Zepetnek.%20Purdue%20Scholarly%20Publishing%20Services,%202013,%20375%20pp.&amp;rft.jtitle=Digital%20Humanities%20Quarterly&amp;rft.stitle=DHQ&amp;rft.issn=1938-4122&amp;rft.date=&amp;rft.volume=009&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.aulast=Pinto&amp;rft.aufirst=Isabel&amp;rft.au=Isabel%20Pinto"> </span></div>
            
            
            <div id="DHQtext">
               
               
               <div id="abstract">
                  <h2>Abstract</h2>
                  
                  <p>A review of <cite class="title italic">Digital Humanities and the Study of Intermediality
                        in Comparative Cultural Studies</cite>, edited by Steven Tötösy de Zepetnek.
                     Purdue Scholarly Publishing Services, 2013, 375 pp.
                  </p>
                  
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               <div class="counter"><a href="#p1">1</a></div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p1">First, it must be acknowledged that <cite class="title italic">Digital Humanities and the
                     Study of Intermediality in Comparative Cultural Studies</cite> is a rather
                  comprehensive volume containing numerous and relevant contributions on the still
                  emergent field of intermedial studies, considering its 375 pages, 28 articles, plus
                  an introduction. Additionally, the book offers a "Bibliography
                  for Work in Intermediality and Digital Humanities," which is fully
                  complete, and useful, and an "Index" (371-375). The
                  articles assembled, as noted in the introduction, were previously published in the
                  online quarterly <cite class="title italic">CLCWeb: Comparative Literature and Culture
                     </cite><a class="ref" href="http://docs.lib.purdue.edu/clcweb" onclick="window.open('http://docs.lib.purdue.edu/clcweb'); return false">http://docs.lib.purdue.edu/clcweb</a>.
               </div>
               
               <div class="counter"><a href="#p2">2</a></div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p2">In the introduction, Steven Tötösy de Zepetnek, the editor, presents the volume by
                  asserting how intermediality reshapes the encounters of different scholarship fields
                  – namely literature, philosophy, art, sociology, and pedagogy – amidst the larger
                  umbrella of digital humanities. By documenting some of these fruitful encounters,
                  the
                  volume allows for a fresh look into the field’s 21st-century agenda, namely by
                  addressing the role of new media in fostering new cultural practices and social
                  endeavors. This book aims to bridge the gap, at least to some extent, between
                  mediated societies and the rest of the world, inasmuch as it tackles the different
                  kinds of inequalities that make for our globalized world. Although the volume
                  presents itself as a comprehensive guide towards intermedial studies, its
                  organization reflects this aim poorly. Articles are simply displayed in sequence,
                  without potentially helpful referents to any broader sections or thematic areas.
                  Furthermore, the presented sequence does not support a proper delimitation of the
                  articles for fields of study. Therefore, for the sake of legibility, I have chosen
                  to
                  group the contributions according to main focus and type of approach adopted. 
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Literature and philosophy</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p3">3</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p3">These articles depart from different genres, or address literature / discourse in
                     their wholeness. Some are mainly theoretical, whether tracing the pathway that led
                     from hermeneutics to media culture studies (Siegfried J. Schmidt), engaging in the
                     application of the concepts of mediality and intermediality to the field of
                     literature (Werner Wolf) or, encompassing different possible articulations between
                     discourse and intermediality (Jens Schröter). On the other hand, other contributions
                     focus on more specific phenomena, such as renowned literary authors like cummings
                     and
                     Mayakovsky (Svetlana Nikitina), or the comics genre (Antonio J. Gil González; Brian
                     Mitchell Peters). Both poetry and comics are understood as manifestations of
                     intermediality, and their present relevance and future developments depend on that
                     assumption. In the field of philosophy, in <cite class="title italic">Intermediality and
                        Aesthetic Theory in Shklovsky's and Adorno's Thought,</cite>” Oleg Gelikman picks
                     up the contribution of the two philosophers to aesthetic theory, and, at the same
                     time, argues that that same theory has become an endeavor of today, within which
                     intermedial works must be taken into consideration.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Translation</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p4">4</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p4">In terms of translation studies, intermediality and mediation account for a revision
                     of traditional concepts on the grounds of world literature and the cross-disciplinary
                     dynamics it originates. The book’s argument entails viewing translation as a platform
                     for interaction of narratives, texts, images and symbols (Erin Schlumpf).
                     Furthermore, the necessary revision is restated when comparing human vs. machine
                     translation, since the results corroborate different intermedial processes with
                     distinctive communicate outcomes (Harry J. Huang). In this way, one becomes resilient
                     towards the traditional contrast between a good and bad translation, considering that
                     in the domain of intermedial practice, what is yet to be faced (described and
                     analyzed) are the different communicative layers, frequently overlapping, within
                     translation.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Pedagogy</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p5">5</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p5">"Intermedial pedagogy" gets its way by pursuing one of two
                     choices: by challenging traditional pedagogical methodology, which implies, for
                     instance, that a widespread range of digital tools be used in direct response to our
                     multicultural world (Kris Rutten and Ronald Soetaert), or by introducing intermedial
                     genres as objects of study. One such genre is the graphic novel, which can help make
                     students aware that cultural literacy nowadays is mainly a question of being able
                     to
                     identify intermediality (Geert Vandermeersche and Ronald Soetaert). In her article,
                     "Digital Humanities in Developed and Emerging Markets",
                     Verena Laschinger summarizes one side of the question, simply by emphasizing the
                     central role of digital humanities in creating a mass of critical thinking in
                     emerging markets like Turkey. 
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Arts</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p6">6</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p6">Regarding the arts, the articles, once again, differ in their fields of inquiry:
                     film, drama, music, architecture and sculpture are contemplated. Film studies can
                     benefit from looking at literature as a means for retextualization drawing on the
                     combination of different media (Ipshita Chanda). In fact, the different layers of
                     reality and fictionality arisen by retextualizaton allow for new intermedial
                     interactions between film and literature. Here Shakespeare can be called on, as, for
                     instance different depictions of Macbeth by three Asian film directors can offer
                     insight into the intercultural dimension of intermediality, on the basis of dominant
                     signifiers, such as political power and struggle for the land (I-Chun Wang). From
                     Shakespeare to French rap, intermediality is consistently used to address
                     multicultural awareness, which is entrenched in different historical narratives
                     (Isabelle Marc Martínez). To a certain extent, the use of historical arguments within
                     multicultural approaches can become a way of engaging in a common narrative.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p7">7</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p7">Focusing on the power of architecture projects to change urban space, the book
                     acknowledges that public space is prone to community interventions, namely street
                     theatres and photomontages that mostly aim to revisit the city as polis (Virgilio
                     Tortosa Garrigós). The work of Eduardo Serra is also revisited on the basis of a new
                     kind of interaction between the context of production and that of the reception of
                     the artwork. Thus the media can, at the same time, facilitate sensorial experiences
                     and meaning assessments (Rocío von Jungenfeld).
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Digital projects</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p8">8</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p8">There are several digital projects presented and reviewed throughout the book.
                     Asunción López-Varela Azcárate and Serge Bouchardon discuss <cite class="title italic">Loss
                        of Grasp</cite>, a digital project by the same Serge Bouchardon and Vincent
                     Volckaert. The authors of the article are able to show how far we have come from a
                     Cartesian understanding of private isolated experience, apart from any kind of
                     external influence, to its communal understanding, according to which the subject,
                     by
                     mirroring himself/herself on the surrounding objects, is ready to be
                     "experienced." The mirroring effect can lead us to the ontological
                     distinction between electronic image and electronic being. Nevertheless, what is yet
                     to be sorted out is the ambiguous condition of electronic realis caught up between
                     human scale and electronic possibilities (Michał Ostrowicki). Still in the domain
                     of
                     electronic possibilities, video games can be seen as new media to "build worlds," in the sense that they endorse the
                     construction of meaning and exercise of creativity (Jeroen Bourgonjon). As a matter
                     of fact, dealing with works/projects which involve different media — image, text,
                     audio — implies a process of revising boundaries across material structures and
                     agency categories (Maya Zalbidea Paniagua). Paul Benzon offers a fresh look into
                     e-mail experience by proposing that advance-fee fraud is a kind of epistolary digital
                     narrative that tries to deceive the addressee by engagement in a fictional world of
                     related events. This intermedial connection between fraud and literature accounts
                     for
                     the unsettling instability of digital mediation itself. Steven Tötösy de Zepetnek,
                     the volume’s editor, presents a comparative survey on daily intake of media with
                     advanced undergraduate students enrolled in media and communication studies at
                     Northeastern University and with advanced undergraduate and graduate students at the
                     University of Halle-Wittenberg. The results showed opposition to cultural
                     participation in media intake, with the two groups displaying similar media cultural
                     participation and practices.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Practices of intermediality</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p9">9</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p9">Along with digital projects, some of the book’s articles rely on different
                     possibilities of intermedial practice. Within this field of inquiry, different
                     processes of dialogue, hybridization, and cultural translation are explored, yet never
                     fail to recognize that communication itself entails obstacles, barriers, and
                     intransigencies (Cristina Peñamarín). Advertising in cable cartoon programming can
                     show that a significant number of advertisements rely on racial, ethnic, and gender
                     values that can best be subsumed in the favoring of white boys relative to girls,
                     and
                     to minority children in general (Debra L. Merskin). Visual culture’s impact can also
                     be analyzed in terms of national configuration. The rise of a burgeoning visual
                     culture, in private and public spaces, can set forth an anti-colonial movement (Kedar
                     Vishwanathan). Moreover, media can still be used as strategy and instrument for
                     public diplomacy. In this context, one is able to identify a history of destruction
                     of monuments played out in the landscape of media by the U.S. government (Reinhold
                     Viehoff). On the other hand, Rebecca J. Romsdahl discusses the effect of the internet
                     and the World Wide Web on political public participation, and proposes that
                     e-participation in policy-making could revitalize the dynamics between citizens and
                     government by increasing citizen participation significantly. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p10">10</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p10">In the whole, this is a useful volume for those interested in conceptualizing the
                     aesthetics of our global world, one in which different mediums, media and
                     mediatization converge in the reinvention of communication probes. In terms of
                     Digital Humanities, this eclecticism paves the way for interdisciplinary debate over
                     concepts, methodologies, and outcomes, expanding the limits of the digital and, at
                     the same time, reframing the contribution of different materialities within it.
                     Intermediality is the new face of postmodern culture, a direct reflex of the mobility
                     and transition that characterizes our encounters within and across cultures.
                     Additionally, by revising the boundaries between cultural studies and digital
                     humanities, the book can easily be read in dialogue with other recent contributions,
                     such as <cite class="title italic">Interdisciplining Digital Humanities: Boundary Work in an Emerging Field</cite>
                     [<a class="ref" href="#klein2015">Klein 2015</a>].
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
            </div>
            
            <div id="worksCited">
               <h2>Works Cited</h2>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="klein2015">
                     <!-- close -->Klein 2015</span> Klein, Julie Thompson. <cite class="title italic">Interdisciplining Digital Humanities: Boundary Work in an Emerging Field</cite>. Ann Arbor, MI: The University of Michigan Press, 2015.
               </div>
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar"><a href="#">Preview</a>  |  <span style="color: grey">XML</span> |  <a href="#" onclick="javascript:window.print();" title="Click for print friendly version">Print Article</a></div>
         </div>
      </div>
   </body>
</html>