<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
      <title>[PREVIEW] DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly: </title>
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_screen.css" media="screen" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_print.css" media="print" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" /><style type="text/css">
        #mainContent {
          float: none;
          padding-top: 2em;
          padding-left: 4em;
          padding-right: 4em;
          margin-left: 225px;
           
        }</style></head>
   <body>
      <div id="mainContent">
         <div class="DHQarticle">
            <div id="pubInfo">Preview<br />Volume 015 Number 2
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar">
               <form id="taporware" action="get">
                  <div><a href="//preview/index.html">Preview</a>
                      | 
                     <a rel="external" href="//vol/15/2/000552.xml">XML</a>
                     
                     | 
                     		   Discuss
                     			(<a href="/dhq/vol/15/2/000552/000552.html#disqus_thread" data-disqus-identifier="000552">
                        				Comments
                        			</a>)
                     
                  </div>
               </form>
            </div>
            
            <div class="DHQheader">
               
               
               
               
               <h1 class="articleTitle lang en">Going Digital: Teaching Crevecoeur in the
                  Twenty-First Century
               </h1>
               
               
               <div class="author"><span style="color: grey">Mary Mcaleer Balkun</span> &lt;<a href="mailto:mary_dot_balkun_at_shu_dot_edu" onclick="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('mary_dot_balkun_at_shu_dot_edu'); return false;" onkeypress="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('mary_dot_balkun_at_shu_dot_edu'); return false;">mary_dot_balkun_at_shu_dot_edu</a>&gt;, Seton Hall University
               </div>
               
               <div class="author"><span style="color: grey">Diana Hope Polley</span> &lt;<a href="mailto:dpolley_at_snhu_dot_edu" onclick="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('dpolley_at_snhu_dot_edu'); return false;" onkeypress="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('dpolley_at_snhu_dot_edu'); return false;">dpolley_at_snhu_dot_edu</a>&gt;, United States Air Force Academy
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               <span class="Z3988" title="url_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;rft_val_fmt=info%3Aofi%2Ffmt%3Akev%3Amtx%3Ajournal&amp;rfr_id=info%3Asid%2Fzotero.org%3A2&amp;rft.genre=article&amp;rft.atitle=Going%20Digital%3A%20Teaching%20Crevecoeur%20in%20the%20Twenty-First%20Century&amp;rft.jtitle=Digital%20Humanities%20Quarterly&amp;rft.stitle=DHQ&amp;rft.issn=1938-4122&amp;rft.date=2021-06-15&amp;rft.volume=015&amp;rft.issue=2&amp;rft.aulast=Mcaleer Balkun&amp;rft.aufirst=Mary&amp;rft.au=Mary%20Mcaleer Balkun&amp;rft.au=Diana%20Hope Polley"> </span></div>
            
            
            <div id="DHQtext">
               
               
               <div id="abstract">
                  <h2>Abstract</h2>
                  
                  
                  <p>In this essay, we trace our early and ongoing development in creating a digital
                     critical edition of J. Hector St. Jean de Crèvecoeur’s <cite class="title italic">Letters from an American Farmer</cite>. We discuss our shift from print to
                     digital publishing technologies and outline the challenges and lessons learned
                     as two senior faculty members starting out in the digital humanities. The essay
                     not only addresses our process in developing the digital edition but also our
                     various experiences piloting the edition with our students. In several brief
                     case studies, we analyze the value of integrating print vs. digital mediums into
                     the classroom as well as our efforts to transfer editorial control over to our
                     students, using the digital to teach them how to become curators of text.
                  </p>
                  
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p1">1</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p1">During a 2011 Northeast Modern Language Association (NeMLA) panel dedicated to
                     the works of eighteenth-century French-American author J. Hector St. John de
                     Crèvecoeur, panelists and attendees participated in an engaged discussion
                     regarding the rewards and challenges of teaching Crèvecoeur to 21st-century
                     college students. Among the biggest challenges discussed, audience members noted
                     the surprising lack of available teaching editions of Crèvecoeur’s most
                     celebrated work, <cite class="title italic">Letters from an American Farmer</cite>.
                     American literature anthologies, for example, typically include only small
                     sections of <cite class="title italic">Letters</cite> as a way to introduce students
                     to the style and subject matter of Crèvecoeur’s text. Trade publishers such as
                     Dover, Penguin Classics, and Oxford Classics have published complete editions of
                     the text, but — with their lack of limited (if any) annotations and other
                     supplementary aids for textual, historical, cultural, or critical
                     interpretations — these editions are not ideal for classroom use and have not
                     been published with educators and students in mind.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e227">[1]</a> Given the literary and cultural significance yet
                     textual complexity of Crèvecoeur’s narrative, panel attendants remarked, there
                     was a decisive need for a teaching edition of <cite class="title italic">Letters</cite>.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p2">2</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p2">Since meeting as presenters on this NeMLA panel, we have teamed up to try to
                     identify a workable solution to what we saw as a challenge to professors of
                     early American literature: finding a way to allow faculty to more fully
                     integrate Crèvecoeur’s <cite class="title italic">Letters</cite> into the college
                     classroom. This article will outline our pedagogical concerns with current print
                     editions of Crèvecoeur’s work (and other early American texts); lessons learned
                     from our early research on alternative digital critical models; our attempts as
                     faculty to begin to develop and create a digital critical edition of <cite class="title italic">Letters</cite>; our experiences using this digital edition in
                     the classroom; and the broader implications for the growth of digital editions
                     of early American (and other) texts. Finally, we will discuss an initially
                     unanticipated shift in our project: transferring the editorial responsibilities
                     over to our students and teaching them to curate the text themselves as a way to
                     help them become active readers, to deepen their engagement with material, to
                     educate them about the editorial process, and to move them towards the
                     professional.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Context</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p3">3</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p3">Crèvecoeur’s <cite class="title italic">Letters from an American Farmer</cite> is a
                     complex, comprehensive canonical American text studied across disciplines,
                     including English, History, and Political Science. What makes the text so well
                     suited for classroom discussion at all levels are the questions it raises about
                     American identity and utopian idealism, as well as the rich and varied ways it
                     does so. In asking that now famous question, “What then is
                     the American, this new man?”, Crèvecoeur’s <cite class="title italic">Letters</cite> became the first and most important text to openly examine
                     early American identity, culture, politics, and social structures (Letter III).
                     The narrative seeks to address all facets of American colonial life on the eve
                     of the American Revolution. Caught between a utopian view of the colonies shaped
                     by Enlightenment thinking and the growing chaos and conflict around him, the
                     narrator simultaneously highlights both early idealism and disillusionment in
                     the American project. In the process, he touches on fundamental issues that were
                     prevalent in late eighteenth-century America and are still of critical
                     significance today: immigration, commerce, the frontier, the environment,
                     Indigenous populations, the transatlantic slave trade, and disparate class
                     structures. In addition to its approach to important social and historical
                     issues, the text — as an epistolary novel that skirts the boundaries between
                     fiction, history, and autobiography — poses fundamental questions about literary
                     form itself. <cite class="title italic">Letters</cite> offers students, teachers, and
                     scholars alike a critical lens through which to examine American history,
                     politics, culture, literature, and language.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p4">4</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p4">Despite the popularity of, the importance of, and the classroom opportunities
                     provided by Crèvecoeur’s text, it is difficult for students to access and
                     interpret for a number of reasons. The late-eighteenth-century language is
                     challenging in its own right. The question of the text’s genre is also
                     convoluted: <cite class="title italic">Letters</cite> is an epistolary narrative
                     comprised of twelve letters written by a fictional character, an Orange County
                     New York farmer James, to a British subject named Mr. F.B., describing — as
                     James says — “our American modes of farming, our manners,
                     and peculiar customs” (Letter I). Although Crèvecoeur himself was
                     French born and only immigrated to America in the late 1750s, he shares enough
                     qualities with James — as a farmer, living in Orange County New York, struggling
                     to navigate the tenuous socio-historical dynamics of rural life on the cusp of
                     the American Revolution — that the text ultimately blurs the boundaries between
                     autobiography, non-fictional prose, and the novel. The ambiguous genre often
                     makes it difficult for students to ascertain the distance between the author and
                     the narrator. This distance is further complicated by sudden narrative shifts
                     between and even within letters, where, for example, notes or brief histories
                     from James or even from another writer are occasionally inserted into the
                     narrative. Finally, and most importantly, the narrative itself is engrained in
                     the socio-historical background of the late Colonial period in America as well
                     as the complex philosophy of the Enlightenment (and, arguably, the ultimate
                     breakdown of that philosophy) and, as such, includes references to various
                     eighteenth-century subjects — botany, farming, hunting, whaling, slavery,
                     Indigenous culture, religion — that often elude twenty-first century
                     readers.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p5">5</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p5"> To fill the gap left by anthologies that publish fragments of <cite class="title italic">Letters</cite> — but fail to illustrate the complexities of
                     genre, the development of the narrative, the narrator’s emerging story, as well
                     as its radically shifting tone — and trade editions that publish the complete
                     text — but lack the necessary detailed annotations and developed ancillary
                     materials to make sense of the context — we set out to publish a print critical
                     edition of the complete text, replete with those necessary supplementary reading
                     materials. We reached out to a couple of publishers, such as Norton and
                     Broadview, who specialize in critical editions particularly developed for and
                     marketed towards the college classroom. We received interest in our initial
                     inquiries and requests for more developed proposals, but ultimately the
                     consensus seemed to be that — although a teaching edition of <cite class="title italic">Letters</cite> was, indeed, both timely and valuable — given
                     the trade editions currently available, the market could not accommodate another
                     print edition.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Exploring a Digital Edition — from the Theoretical to the Practical</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p6">6</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p6"> Because of the limited print publishing options and the growing rise in the
                     digital market, we decided to shift course and research digital publishing
                     possibilities. As we did, we quickly realized that, while more challenging, the
                     digital might provide a better opportunity to achieve our primary goal: to make
                     Crèvecoeur’s text not only available but also accessible to the twenty-first
                     century student. Given the very intertextual nature of Crèvecoeur’s writing, a
                     digital approach to his work began to make the most sense, particularly for
                     today’s students. Not only are twenty-first century students woefully uninformed
                     about much of the history and culture of early America but they are also not
                     inclined to do research (even using an online dictionary) to look up
                     information. Unfortunately, printed footnotes are not especially useful either,
                     since most students tend to skip them: today’s students are used to having
                     information at their fingertips — and lots of it. The elements of Crèvecoeur
                     that students, especially non-English or History majors, often tend to find dull
                     (the sections on botany and whaling, for instance) could now be made visual and
                     relevant to, almost tactile for, the contemporary reader. In addition, as an
                     open-source edition, this new format would speak to potential print edition
                     market concerns, would expand open access to early American literature for
                     students and other readers alike, would allow us to engage in the growing field
                     of the digital humanities, and could eventually provide the opportunity to
                     further develop our project to include other early American texts. In general,
                     an online edition would allow us to make use of current developments in
                     technology that would maximize the learning potential for readers and open up
                     the textual world of early America to those outside academia.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p7">7</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p7"> While the digital option was compelling, it created a number of immediate
                     challenges. The most self-evident obstacle was that, while both of us had
                     various levels of expertise and experience utilizing technology in the
                     classroom, neither of us at the time could claim to be “digital
                     humanists.” In essence, we “fell into” the
                     digital humanities. Rather than a conscious dive into the digital — its
                     practical applications, its theoretical underpinnings, and the nuances of its
                     scholarship — we were led there, essentially as a publishing refuge when we
                     realized that the analog could no longer accommodate what we had initially hoped
                     to produce. Not only were we not coders, but to cross over into the digital we
                     would have to begin, largely as novices, to investigate whether there were any
                     publishing platforms that could accommodate our Platonic ideal of this edition;
                     and then we would have to consider the theoretical implications of this
                     publishing paradigm shift, implications that we could not then even fully
                     anticipate. Although this circuitous route toward the digital humanities is no
                     doubt far more typical in academia, this alternate perspective — the attempt to
                     penetrate the digital humanities after years of producing more traditional
                     scholarship — is not readily reflected in DH scholarship. Matthew K. Gold and
                     Laura F. Klein’s 2012, 2016, and 2019 <cite class="title italic">Debates in the
                        Digital Humaities</cite>, for example, each presents a near exhaustive
                     approach to the “debates” in the digital humanities —
                     defining, theorizing, critiquing, teaching, and envisioning the future of DH (in
                     the 2012 edition, for example) — but by and large each edition still focuses on
                     those who already understand the terms of the debate. In what follows, we hope
                     to add to the rich discussion of the digital humanities by offering a slightly
                     different perspective: a process that involved familiarizing ourselves with
                     foundational digital humanities scholarship, exploring relevant digital
                     platforms, and engaging with other digital humanities projects and pedagogies to
                     begin to carve a space for our digital edition. In short, we hope to share our
                     occasionally painful, frequently tortuous and challenging, but also deeply
                     rewarding process of “going digital.”
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p8">8</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p8"> The first step in switching our perspective from the print to the digital was
                     confronting new theoretical questions, including critical and pedagogical issues
                     that were not evident when our goal was simply to make a print critical edition
                     of <cite class="title italic">Letters from an American Farmer</cite>. For one thing,
                     the existence of and increasing emphasis on digital texts over their print
                     counterparts has raised, and continues to raise, questions about the very nature
                     of scholarship, criticism, and textuality as well as how these elements
                     intersect. In their “Introduction” to <cite class="title italic">Text Editing, Print and the Digital World</cite>, Marilyn
                     Deegan and Kathryn Sutherland provide an overview of some of these critical
                     issues. For example, can the standards and methods used to create print texts
                     also be considered valid when creating digital editions, and how does the nature
                     of the text impact the way it is read and used? In short, they observe, “Our ideas of what constitutes a literary work are under
                     revision: what factors determine its boundaries and shape, what we mean by
                     ‘text’ and what features define it”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#deegan2009">Deegan and Sutherland 2009</a>]. The questions that guided their 2009 volume in many
                     ways remain at the heart of debates over digital editions today; we had to
                     consider several of these questions as we began to investigate digital
                     options.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p9">9</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p9">The most important and immediate question we had to confront was the one about
                     form: what exactly did we mean when we said we were compiling a “digital ‘critical edition’”? In <cite class="title italic">Digital Scholarly Editing: Theories, Models and
                        Methods</cite>, Elena Pierazzo, referencing the work of Edward Vanhoutte,
                     observes that “a great theoretical effort has been deployed
                     in order to distinguish digital archives from digital editions and
                     documentary editions from critical editions”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#pierazzo2015">Pierazzo 2015</a>]. Our first task was to tease out these
                     differences. We had in mind the Norton editions as a generally accepted and
                     respected model of a print “critical edition”: a text with an
                     approved version of the text; annotations that explain terms, concepts, and
                     references to help guide the reader; documents that set the text in its
                     historical and cultural context; scholarly articles that introduce the reader to
                     the critical conversation taking place around the text over time; and a
                     bibliography.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p10">10</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p10">When translating this model of a critical edition to the digital, we generally
                     subscribed to the type of ideal digital model Peter Shilingsburg outlines in
                     “How Literary Works Exist: Convenient Scholarly
                     Editions”: 
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>
                           The scholarly electronic edition of the future…will be
                           convenient: it will be as cheap as a paperback book, with a
                           user-friendly interface…with bookmarks, highlighting, space for marginal
                           notes, and the ability to annotate… In order to avoid the down sides of
                           paperback books, the electronic edition must give accurate access to
                           representations (images) of specific historical forms of the text and
                           specific critical editions of the text and to the ancillary materials
                           that contextualized the texts at the time of origin and the times of
                           reception that we care about. It would be even more convenient if the
                           accumulation of scholarship related to the work were also at hand.  [<a class="ref" href="#shillingsburg2009">Shillingsburg 2009</a>]
                           
                        </p>
                     </blockquote> While we wanted to make all of these digital materials
                     “convenient” and “at hand” for the
                     reader [<a class="ref" href="#shillingsburg2009">Shillingsburg 2009</a>], we were also cognizant of the tension
                     regarding the digital that Jessica Pressman and Lisa Swanstrom cogently
                     articulate in “The Literary And/As the Digital
                     Humanities,” specifically the tension between data/information and
                     interpretation in DH. We wanted to utilize the digital to provide that critical
                     information for readers (annotations, ancillary materials, accumulation of
                     scholarship) but simultaneously prevent the digital from turning readers into
                     passive recipients of knowledge. In order to ensure that these technological
                     tools would be used to help readers become engaged participants, to make sure,
                     in the words of Pressman and Swanstrom, “literary critics
                     don’t take data at its word,” we wanted to incorporate interactive
                     features, such as integrated reading questions and the and the capacity for
                     commentary [<a class="ref" href="#pressman2013">Pressman and Swanstrom 2013</a>].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p11">11</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p11">Most importantly, however, we agreed with Patrick Sahle’s definition in “What is a Scholarly Digital Edition?” that “a digitized edition is not a digital edition”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#sahle2016">Sahle 2016</a>]. We did not want to create a digitized facsimile of
                     an analog edition. Rather, we wanted to take the work that digital archive
                     projects such as <cite class="title italic">Project Gutenberg</cite> had done and
                     make these unedited digital texts not only available but <em class="emph">accessible</em>
                     to students. Acknowledging that we would not be able to create that
                     “ideal” edition of the future that Shillingsburg
                     outlines, we aimed to approximate a version of it. Our initial plan was to
                     create a digital edition of Crèvecoeur’s <cite class="title italic">Letters</cite>
                     that would include critical annotations as well as links to appropriate
                     supplemental materials as hypertext; students would be able to move their cursor
                     over or click on a word to locate definitions, reading questions, historical and
                     cultural references, videos, and hyperlinks to relevant web sites. We wanted to
                     create an interactive experience for the reader that included the kinds of
                     dynamic features Sahle uses to define digital editions: “browsing paths,”
                     “real hyperlinks,” and “integrated technical tools”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#sahle2016">Sahle 2016</a>].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p12">12</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p12"> While critics such as Sahle stop short of distinguishing between a
                     <em class="emph">critical</em> and scholarly edition, our goal was to move beyond
                     form and also to distinguish our digital critical edition of <cite class="title italic">Letters</cite> from a <em class="emph">scholarly</em> edition that
                     focused primarily on textual criticism. Dennis D. Moore has published several
                     collections of Crèvecoeur’s writing that pay careful attention to textual
                     sources and composition and are critical for academic scholarship. We hoped to
                     take on the work that Kathryn Sutherland claims has been deemed less glamorous:
                     the kind of textual annotation that is “most in favour with
                     student readers, general readers and commercially minded publishers, to all
                     of whom it is perceived as adding value”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#sutherland2009">Sutherland 2009</a>]. And perhaps this was one place where digital
                     editions could start to differ from their analog counterparts: that they take
                     seriously the place of textual annotations and the readers who value them. At
                     the same time, we were concerned with maintaining the accuracy of the edition
                     and demonstrating that this type of innovative and interactive digital edition
                     could be as viable and reliable as the more traditional printed one we had hoped
                     to create at the outset. This is why we were careful about the edition of <cite class="title italic">Letters</cite> we chose to use and about creating that
                     edition ourselves, not depending on another digital edition already in
                     existence, although there are several. We ultimately chose the 1783 Thomas
                     Davies London edition of <cite class="title italic">Letters</cite> as the most
                     authoritative, and transcribed the text from a digital facsimile of the original
                     into a .doc file to ensure its accuracy. In addition, any minimal emendations
                     that were made would be noted in the edition. The focus would be on editing the
                     apparatus over the text, but at the same time we wanted to ensure textual
                     precision.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p13">13</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p13"> Beyond the theoretical underpinnings, the challenges we faced were also quite
                     practical: while we have both used technology in various forms for our teaching
                     (such as learning management systems, presentation tools, group communication
                     tools) and recognize its pedagogical potential in the classroom, neither one of
                     us had extensive experience with digital publishing platforms. Furthermore,
                     neither of us knew or was prepared to learn website-building languages such as
                     HTML, CSS, or Javascript. Given our own technological limitations, we began to
                     explore what types of digital critical editions had already been published
                     online, either early American or other literary texts. This research would give
                     us a general sense of the scope of similar existing and ongoing digital
                     projects, specifically critical editions geared towards college-level classroom
                     use; it would allow us to ascertain the technologies that might have been used
                     to create such projects (as well as provide us with valuable contacts); and it
                     would provide us with a better visual sense of the parameters for our project —
                     the kind of architectural, stylistic, and pedagogical opportunities, as well as
                     the boundaries such various technologies might afford us.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p14">14</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p14"> What surprised us initially was not how many but rather how few digital critical
                     editions we were initially able to locate easily and readily online, and in
                     particular how few online editions we found with interactive, digitized
                     annotations and hyperlinks, new textual models constructed with the contemporary
                     student in mind. Extensive and invaluable progress has clearly been made in
                     recent decades in the digital humanities. Well-known digital archives, such as
                     <cite class="title italic">Project Gutenberg</cite> and the Internet Archive,
                     have done immeasurable work digitizing texts and making them available online
                     for teaching and scholarship purposes, but the purpose of these important
                     projects has been primarily to archive these texts rather than to annotate or
                     edit them. More recently, smaller non-profit projects have contributed critical
                     work in this area. <cite class="title italic">Just Teach One</cite>, sponsored by
                     <cite class="title italic">Commonplace: The Journal of Early American
                        Life</cite>, is one example of a digital recovery project that is more
                     specifically suited for the classroom, as it not only offers digital
                     transcriptions of texts (in this case “neglected or
                     forgotten” early American texts) but also annotates and edits them.
                     While <cite class="title italic">Just Teach One</cite> and projects like it provide
                     editions with a basic apparatus, they are still not “digital critical
                     editions” in the sense that they are digitized PDFs, which is to
                     say that they do not offer those “integrated technical
                     tools” Sahle characterizes as an essential part of such digital
                     editions [<a class="ref" href="#sahle2016">Sahle 2016</a>].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p15">15</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p15">Many other digital projects are working on that same important process of
                     recovery and/or preservation but also offer various levels of dynamic
                     integration with those critical “technical tools.”
                     Other sites, such as <cite class="title italic">Digital Library of Medieval
                        Manuscripts</cite> and <cite class="title italic">American Transcendentalism
                        Web</cite>, as well as single-author archival projects, such as the <cite class="title italic">Willa Cather Archive</cite>, <cite class="title italic">The Walt
                        Whitman Archive</cite>, <cite class="title italic">Jane Austen
                        Manuscripts</cite>, <cite class="title italic">Digital Thoreau</cite>, and
                     <cite class="title italic">The William Blake Archive</cite>, are representative
                     of the type of digital textual scholarship and digital reading experiences being
                     created online. Each of these sites offers distinctive digital models with
                     unique features particularly valuable for those starting out in the digital
                     humanities. For example, <cite class="title italic">Internet Shakespeare</cite>
                     offers the ancillary material (an Introduction, Critical Survey, Bibliography,
                     etc…) fundamental to a critical edition, various versions of each text, and the
                     type of digitally-integrated annotations we planned to include. <cite class="title italic">The William Blake Archive</cite> integrates multimedia to
                     recreate exhibitions of Blake’s work. <cite class="title italic">Digital
                        Thoreau</cite> makes manifest a “fluid text” edition of
                     the seven existing manuscript versions of <cite class="title italic">Walden</cite>.
                     While each of these sites, and the majority of those we examined, tend to be
                     geared towards micro-literary communities, we did identify other
                     interdisciplinary projects, such as <cite class="title italic">The Vault at Pfaff’s:
                        An Archive of Art and Literature by the Bohemians of Antebellum New
                        York</cite>, sponsored by Lehigh University, which provide a cornucopia of
                     primary and secondary sources, a digital arcade of hyperlinked sources, but
                     which are focused on a very limited theme, in this case the fascinating 1860s
                     New York City bohemian world of Charles Pfaff’s Manhattan beer cellar. Finally,
                     we discovered some for-profit digital publishers, such as Touch Press, which
                     work with publishers to create digital content; Touch Press's version of T.S.
                     Eliot’s <cite class="title italic">The Wasteland</cite> includes notes, various audio
                     recordings, and critical and dramatic interpretations of the poem.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p16">16</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p16">Each of these projects was valuable in helping us to conceive of possibilities
                     within the framework of digital publishing; we did, however, learn two valuable,
                     interrelated lessons in our initial investigation. First, the sites we found
                     most readily tended to be geared to scholarly rather than critical editions of
                     work. <cite class="title italic">Digital Thoreau</cite>, for instance, is more
                     thoroughly focused on what Kathryn Sutherland calls “the
                     establishment of the text, its variants and transmission history” as
                     opposed to the interdisciplinary, multimedia critical edition we hoped to
                     create. As discussed, scholarly editions of Crèvecoeur’s <cite class="title italic">Letters of an American Farmer</cite> currently exist, and we were not
                     looking to create another. Rather we sought to create an open-source digital
                     edition for the student for whom those unmediated, scholarly print editions were
                     intimidating and difficult to penetrate. In short, although the sites we found
                     were helpful in showcasing the array of options the digital might provide
                     (integrated multimedia, interactive comment tools, hyperlinked annotations), the
                     projects were far larger in scope (e.g. exhaustive single-author archives) and
                     seemed framed with a different audience in mind.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p17">17</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p17">The most important lesson we learned from this hands-on, primary research,
                     however, was not what we found but rather how hard the material itself was to
                     find. We were struck by the fact that these projects were not catalogued
                     anywhere; instead, they seemed to float in separate silos rather than being
                     gathered together in a single or even several classified repositories. To find a
                     print critical edition, one can search on Amazon or ask a local book seller; to
                     find a digital critical edition, one either needs to be a scholar in a specific
                     literary field or have some similar entry point. There are online directories,
                     such as the Omeka Directory and the Open Access Directory, which gather all
                     types of digital sites and projects, but they do not specifically identify
                     critical editions as such. By contrast, we had hoped to locate a repository of
                     digital editions much in the same way one can go to <cite class="title italic">Project
                        Gutenberg</cite> to locate a collection of unedited electronic texts.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p18">18</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p18">Thus, in addition to the challenges already named, we soon realized that if we
                     were to move to the digital, one of our challenges would be to figure out how to
                     make our open-source edition available to those beyond our own students. If
                     well-resourced projects such as <cite class="title italic">Internet Shakespeare
                        Editions or Jane Austen Manuscripts</cite> were not immediately evident to
                     us as professors of English and newly-inquiring digital humanists, how could we
                     ensure that our edition would ultimately be generally available to students and
                     other educators alike? We began to recognize that we would also need to navigate
                     the important issue of a repository, a digital cooperative where readers could
                     go to access the edition itself as well as other digital critical editions being
                     done in the shadows. As a result, our search for an appropriate platform
                     expanded to include one that could serve as a repository while also being
                     readily available to others.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p19">19</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p19"> Initially, we had hoped to find an online press or nonprofit scholarly platform
                     that was developing these types of digital critical editions and might be able
                     to share information on emerging technologies appropriate to creating such an
                     edition and potentially even hosting the Crèvecoeur edition we planned to
                     produce. Although we failed to find that source in our early research, we
                     discovered a promising publishing platform called “Scalar” when we attended a workshop entitled “Critical DH (Digital Humanities) Interventions in Scholarly Communications
                     and Publishing” at the 2015 Modern Language Association (MLA)
                     Convention in Vancouver, Canada. Scalar describes itself as “a free, open source authoring and publishing platform that’s designed to
                     make it easy for authors to write long-form, born-digital scholarship
                     online. Scalar enables users to assemble media from multiple sources and
                     juxtapose them with their own writing in a variety of ways, with minimal
                     technical expertise required”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#scalar">About Scalar</a>]. We had some basic concerns with the publishing
                     platform, specifically that we would be constructing this edition using a
                     technological infrastructure that was uniquely built by Scalar and housed by the
                     Alliance for Networking Visual Culture. Once we designed the edition within the
                     framework of Scalar’s platform, we would not be able to move it. Should its
                     funding source fail or should we find a more appropriate platform, we would have
                     to start from scratch. Given the 75,000-word length of <cite class="title italic">Letters</cite>, this prospect was daunting.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p20">20</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p20">That said, in all other respects Scalar was almost exactly the type of platform
                     we were looking for. Like WordPress the program was user-friendly, but unlike
                     WordPress, Scalar was designed by academics for the specific purpose of
                     developing innovative digital online scholarship, and as such each new project
                     was appropriately and reassuringly called a “book.” The
                     open-source platform had partnered with various humanities centers that
                     permitted its authors to integrate media more seamlessly, and its design allowed
                     for a clean but flexible and varied display of interactive digital features —
                     from basic notes to internal tags and paths to annotated audio or visual images
                     to reader comments. Given that our initial research pointed to ongoing work in
                     the digital humanities and, more specifically, work on digital critical editions
                     that was still quite piecemeal and dispersed, Scalar seemed like an excellent
                     option: the project would be housed on an academic platform whose mission was
                     linked to scholarly work within the field of the digital humanities, and it
                     offered us the technology we needed without the immediate requirement of
                     technical expertise.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p21">21</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p21"> Before committing to Scalar, however, we spent some time looking at other
                     platforms, such as Omeka, an open-source web publishing platform. Two major
                     differences made us realize that Scalar was clearly the better choice. First,
                     Scalar describes itself as a platform for those who want to publish “book-length works”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#scalar">About Scalar</a>], and Omeka specializes in hosting “digital collections and…media-rich online exhibits”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#omeka">Omeka</a>]; since we were focused on creating a book-length work,
                     Scalar was ideal in this regard. Second, the free Omeka Classic version requires
                     users to have an external server to host their material, while Scalar offers a
                     server as part of their platform. In short, Scalar is self-contained and free,
                     and for those who are beginning in the digital humanities, this makes it a more
                     user-friendly option. Finally, however, and most importantly, we didn’t really
                     find Scalar; Scalar in essence came to us. For two academics who “fell
                     into” the digital humanities and had a specific project in mind,
                     being able to engage with Scalar at an MLA workshop, hands-on, with other
                     academics, and having access to Scalar representatives with whom we could keep
                     in touch to ask specific technological and strategic questions, this platform
                     was clearly the right place to start.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Creating a Digital Edition</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p22">22</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p22">Once we had identified a suitable platform and began to build the edition, some
                     strategic questions related to annotations and hyperlinks became apparent. The
                     issue of hyperlink “stability” is, of course, one that is
                     repeatedly discussed when developing online materials. For example, in “URLs Link Rot: Implications for Electronic Publishing,”
                     a study of articles published by Emerald Publishers between 2008 and 2012, D.
                     Vinay Kumar, B. T. Sampath Kumar, and D. R. Parameshwarappa “found that 48.53 per cent of URL citations were not accessible and the
                     remaining 51.47 per cent of URL citations were still accessible”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#kumar2015">Kumar, Kumar, and Parameshwarappa</a>]. A related issue involves open-source accessibility.
                     We had decided to use the <cite class="title italic">Oxford English Dictionary
                        (OED)</cite> as our source for annotated definitions; we not only wanted to
                     offer contextually-appropriate eighteenth-century definitions but also to
                     include the link to the original online source so that students could peruse the
                     various definitions further as well as other information, such as the word’s
                     pronunciation, etymology, and origin. The problem is that the <cite class="title italic">OED</cite> requires an account, and we expressly wanted to
                     avoid subscription-based sources and the need to sign in to retrieve annotation
                     links. As a result, we chose the less ideal course: to construct our own
                     definitions and provide a link to the online <cite class="title italic">Merriam-Webster Dictionary</cite> for ancillary information. Similar
                     challenges arose regarding historical, philosophical, scientific, and other
                     related hyperlinks. The contextual relevancy, the scholarly value, the factual
                     accuracy, and the stability of the link were of primary importance. More
                     largely, however, we wanted to build a conscious plan about the types of sources
                     we privileged. What open sources would count as scholarly enough? Would the
                     History Channel, for example, be a source academic enough for college-level
                     students? If so, would we want to try to use that source as consistently as
                     possible? Would it be better to locate the most suitable source for any given
                     textual reference, or might the edition then seem like a random hodge podge of
                     hyperlinks without a specific purpose, targeted audience, and directed
                     coherence? This issue was compounded by exactly what had drawn us to this
                     project in the first place: a sufficient number of the references in <cite class="title italic">Letters from an American Farmer</cite> were abstruse enough
                     not to offer us a wealth of dynamic online reference options.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p23">23</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p23"> There were other challenges as well that involved not only strategy but time:
                     what became immediately evident was that this digital project was going to be
                     far more time consuming than our initial plan to construct a print edition. In
                     addition to struggling through the ins-and-outs of Scalar’s architecture and
                     learning the various facets of its technological possibilities (and
                     limitations), every attempt to insert an annotation, include a hyperlink, or
                     embed media involved several steps and a careful system of organization. Given
                     that Scalar’s infrastructure is not (unlike WordPress, for example) based on
                     hierarchical relationships but has, instead, what it calls a “flattened
                     hierarchy” (where every “node” is treated as a
                     “page” on the same level, and the editor can connect the
                     pages as desired), each new page would need to be given a careful title and
                     description that would allow us to connect it to the text as desired and, as
                     importantly, be able to relocate it as needed later amongst hundreds and (given
                     the length of this text) potentially thousands of other
                     “pages.” And once a page was created and the annotation
                     or embedded media image or hyperlink was constructed, the page would then need
                     to be internally linked to the appropriate word or phrase in the text itself.
                     The academic and pedagogical process was only a portion of the work; the
                     technological work was also a challenge, and without the help of graduate
                     assistants or the support of grants, the project was going to take more time
                     than we had hoped. More importantly, the question of scalability — which is to
                     say the ability eventually to create other early American teaching editions and
                     to create a repository for such digital editions — would prove daunting without
                     locating other digital humanities partnerships.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e631">[2]</a></div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p24">24</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p24"> For this reason, we decided to pilot a portion of the project. Before we
                     determined if we were going to dedicate what might be — given our teaching and
                     other research commitments — a year or more of editorial work to finish the
                     whole edition, and before we engraved all twelve letters onto Scalar and became
                     locked into that platform, we chose to complete only a strategic selection of
                     the letters first while simultaneously presenting what we had completed at
                     national conferences and beginning to use this portion of the project in the
                     classroom to start to get feedback from the reader’s perspective. We therefore
                     began working on the four most seminal letters in the text: Letter I, which
                     establishes the narrative context and framework; Letter III, which offers the
                     most salient line and thematic discussion in the text: “What
                     then is the American, this new man?”; Letter IX, which addresses the
                     profligate lifestyle of plantation life in Charleston, South Carolina as well as
                     an extended and powerful diatribe on the evils of slavery; and Letter XII, which
                     presents our narrator and protagonist — once steeped in the idealism and reason
                     of Enlightenment doctrine and confident that the American colonies were “the most perfect society now existing in the world” —
                     now driven to despair by the chaos and danger of the impending American
                     Revolution (Letter III).
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p25">25</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p25"> Although we have made our Scalar digital edition of Crèvecoeur’s <cite class="title italic">Letters</cite> public for the purposes of limited classroom
                     use, conference presentations, and publications, the edition is very much a work
                     in progress. For that reason, we attach the “live” link to
                     the digital edition here — <a href="http://scalar.usc.edu/works/crevecoeur--letters-from-an-american-farmer/index" onclick="window.open('http://scalar.usc.edu/works/crevecoeur--letters-from-an-american-farmer/index'); return false" class="ref">http://scalar.usc.edu/works/crevecoeur--letters-from-an-american-farmer/index</a>
                     — with a certain reticence. In his essay “The Book, the
                     E-text, and the ‘Work Site,’” Paul Eggert helps to explain this
                     reticence when he discusses the relatively “complete” nature
                     of a print publication as a “unified piece of
                     scholarship” — “every part of the volume
                     enlightened by every other part, all of it seamlessly interdependent and
                     unobjectionably cross-referenced, nothing said twice, all of it as near
                     perfectly balanced as you could ever make it” — as opposed to the
                     open-ended, never complete nature of the digital edition, in which errors can be
                     made (or addressed) at any point [<a class="ref" href="#eggert2009">Eggert 2009</a>]. For Eggert, the
                     concern is primarily that such lack of closure “will prove
                     an opportunity to drop [our] standards”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#eggert2009">Eggert 2009</a>]. One might equally point, however, to the anxiety
                     with regards to digital publication of <em class="emph">never</em> attaining perfection
                     or completion. We are still in the early stages of creating the edition (at
                     minimum, we plan to have Letters I, III, IX, and XII annotated and replete with
                     an Introduction, Emendations, and an extended Bibliography); however, we wanted
                     to make the edition available for public commentary as a way to turn the project
                     into a communal critical and pedagogical venture.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p26">26</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p26"> In many ways, our students have played a foundational role in this communal
                     venture. Initially, our plan was simply to pilot the in-progress edition in our
                     undergraduate and graduate classes in order to get a sense of how students
                     engaged with our edition: to get feedback on their experience reading the online
                     edition versus the traditional Norton print text and also on their experience
                     navigating the various types of annotations and hyperlinks in the Scalar
                     interface. As we began to contemplate how the edition might be made available
                     and accessible for students, and as we began to pilot the edition in class,
                     however, it became clear how students could use Scalar to become active
                     participants in their own editorial work. As Brett Hirsch suggests in <cite class="title italic">Digital Humanities Pedagogy</cite>, “the
                     digital humanities is about learning <em class="emph">by</em> doing,” and as
                     we ourselves learned by “going digital,” we wanted to explore
                     how the digital might not only enhance the literary experience for our students
                     but also enhance their own critical thinking experience as well [<a class="ref" href="#hirsch2012">Hirsch 2012</a>, original emphasis]. Thus, in what follows, we
                     discuss the various ways in which we have integrated the project into the
                     classroom: first by piloting our edition in the classroom and then increasingly
                     asking our students to partake in textual ownership, by using Scalar to annotate
                     their own versions of <cite class="title italic">Letters</cite> and then ultimately
                     by using the platform to curate their own texts and create their own digital
                     editions using our edition as a model.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Using Scalar in the Classroom: Piloting the Edition — Diana H. Polley</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p27">27</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p27"> In my Early American Literature class — a 300-level undergraduate course that
                     combined English majors with general education students — at Southern New
                     Hampshire University (SNHU) during fall semester 2017, I had students read
                     versions of Crèvecoeur’s <cite class="title italic">Letters from an American
                        Farmer</cite> in three different formats: portions of the text from the
                     print Norton edition (which I had assigned for the class), portions of the text
                     from our online edition of <cite class="title italic">Letters</cite> that had been
                     edited and annotated, and portions of the text from our online edition that had
                     not yet been annotated. I asked for informal feedback, most importantly
                     regarding whether they preferred reading the text online or in print; whether
                     they preferred the online portions that had been annotated or left unannotated;
                     and, more generally, whether they found the digital edition easy or difficult to
                     navigate and whether the annotations and/or hyperlinks were helpful or
                     intrusive.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p28">28</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p28"> Numerous studies have been done examining the effects of reading digitally
                     versus in print, but the results have been far from conclusive. As Ferris Jabr
                     observes in “The Reading Brain in the Digital Age,”
                     most studies conducted before 1992 
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>
                           concluded that people read slower, less accurately and
                           less comprehensively on screens than on paper. Studies published since
                           the early 1990s, however, have produced more inconsistent results…. And
                           recent surveys suggest that although most people still prefer paper…
                           attitudes are changing as tablets and e-reading technology improve and
                           reading digital books for facts and fun becomes more common.  [<a class="ref" href="#jabr2013">Jabr 2013</a>]
                           
                        </p>
                     </blockquote> Interestingly, I noticed that the preference for print over digital in my
                     informal survey was clearly influenced by disciplinary major: it was my English
                     majors who noted a preference for print over online texts, and I attribute this
                     — given my personal knowledge of the English majors at SNHU — to their having
                     grown up in a culture of print books; they tend to be the students who display
                     in multiple ways (several of whom have tattoos of their favorite novels and
                     poems, for example) a deep investment in the traditional culture of the
                     humanities. Just as interesting, however, the majority of my general education
                     students noted a specific preference for the digital and several mentioned the
                     same reason: the prohibitive cost of print books versus the open access nature
                     of digital books. Having required my students to buy the Norton anthology made
                     them particularly aware, as one student said, that “books
                     tend to be expensive.”
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p29">29</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p29"> Another critical question involved the issue of navigating the edition itself.
                     Jabr points to an experience many readers have when trying to recall where they
                     saw something in an analog text as an example of one of the advantages of print
                     books: “Both anecdotally and in published studies, people
                     report that when trying to locate a particular piece of written information
                     they often remember where in the text it appeared.” In addition, he
                     notes, 
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>
                           An open paperback presents a reader with two clearly
                           defined domains — the left and right pages — and a total of eight
                           corners with which to orient oneself. A reader can focus on a single
                           page of a paper book without losing sight of the whole text: one can see
                           where the book begins and ends and where one page is in relation to
                           those borders… …In contrast, most screens, e-readers, smartphones and
                           tablets interfere with intuitive navigation of a text and inhibit people
                           from mapping the journey in their minds.  [<a class="ref" href="#jabr2013">Jabr 2013</a>]
                           
                        </p>
                     </blockquote>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p30">30</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p30">It was for this reason that, in our digital edition, we decided to keep each
                     chapter of <cite class="title italic">Letters</cite> as a single document, rather
                     than creating separate pages as one would in a book or in trying to mimic an
                     e-book. At its most basic, this allowed students to scroll ahead and see how
                     long the text was and how much more they had to read, something which is not as
                     effective when clicking ahead through numerous, individual pages. This kind of
                     grounding in terms of text length is one way that reading the digital text can
                     be made reminiscent of reading on paper. One can also still orient oneself
                     visually, since for the reader the single “page” chapter can
                     be similar to a book page; instead of “eight corners with which to orient
                     oneself,” the reader “can focus on a single page of a paper
                     book,” even if that page is quite long [<a class="ref" href="#jabr2013">Jabr 2013</a>].
                     While this grounding certainly proved effective with my students, one issue
                     became paramount: without standardized pagination, we had no easy way to locate
                     text for communal discussion in class. Despite the fact that the digital allows
                     for searchability and the textual annotations provide visual landmarks in the
                     text, there were no quick indicators to reference. This experience verified the
                     need for those critical paragraph indicators as a way to maintain a shared sense
                     of orientation, and it became clear that moving forward with the edition we
                     would need to add these visual landmarks.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p31">31</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p31"> Beyond this issue of visual landmarks, one of our main concerns about Scalar was
                     the visible presence of annotations in the form of notecard symbols and
                     highlighted words or phrases, which could prove to be a distraction, snagging
                     the eye and interrupting the reading process. Despite this initial concern,
                     students overwhelmingly found the annotations to be “very
                     helpful.” They noted that the annotations helped them
                     “read faster,” provided context and definitions, and
                     allowed them to stay focused. What was interesting, however, was that while
                     students unanimously found the note-type annotations (notes linked directly to
                     the text on the page) beneficial, they were more split on their assessment of
                     the videos and hyperlinks (those links that took them to external pages). Some
                     noted the videos as particularly illuminating while others found them to be
                     distracting, taking them away from the flow of the text; they generally
                     appreciated the videos and hyperlinks and wanted them to be available, but some
                     suggested the links be offered, unlike the annotations, at the end of a section
                     rather than integrated in the middle of the text itself. Interestingly, it
                     seemed that while many students were accustomed to reading texts that contained
                     visible hyperlinks and other signs of authorial
                     “interference,” picking and choosing what they want to
                     look into as they go along and ignoring the rest, others felt more compelled to
                     engage with each interactive feature, which ultimately diverted them from the
                     flow of the narrative.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p32">32</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p32"> Piloting the edition in class provided a couple of key indicators: it confirmed
                     that the work we were doing on the edition itself was pedagogically valuable,
                     and it offered some important feedback on how to improve the reading experience.
                     What also became clear, however, was that — as valuable as students found the
                     annotations and hyperlinks that we had created for them — the digital benefits
                     of Scalar meant that students could move beyond being just readers of the text.
                     The flip side of the “unified piece of scholarship”
                     Eggert notes in print publications is that, with the digital, students could now
                     interact with the text with more ease and explore their roles not just as
                     passive recipients of the text but as interactive interpreters, as curators of
                     the text [<a class="ref" href="#eggert2009">Eggert 2009</a>].
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Editing the Text: Students Create a Communal Version of <cite class="title italic">Letters</cite> — Mary M. Balkun
                  </h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p33">33</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p33"> It was this role of students as “interactive interpreters,
                     as curators of the text,” that I chose to explore in my approach to
                     the Crèvecoeur project in two graduate classes in early American literature. The
                     first, in spring 2016, was “Hybridity/ies in Early
                     America”; the other, in spring 2017, was “From
                     New Netherland to New York.” In part, I chose a project format that
                     took advantage of the advanced status of these students, but I was also
                     interested in the communal potential of digital texts and seeing how this might
                     be experienced with different groups of students. With a digital text, readers
                     can actively participate in the construction of information, either creating new
                     material or adding to material that already exists. In some cases, readers can
                     edit the existing text (<cite class="title italic">Wikipedia</cite> is probably the
                     best known example of this), and the platform keeps track of edits so that the
                     text becomes a living history of change and response; other texts allow for
                     commentary alone, but the comments still become part of the user experience for
                     readers. Using Scalar for our edition of <cite class="title italic">Letters from an
                        American Farmer</cite> meant we actually had multiple options available.
                     New material could be added to an existing text; an existing text could be
                     elaborated upon or commented on; and these elaborations could themselves be
                     edited. The project as I envisioned it would engage students in the creation of
                     their own, communal version of <cite class="title italic">Letters</cite>, one that
                     would span two different classes, and possibly more in the future.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p34">34</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p34">Given the advanced skill level of the students, having them actually annotate the
                     text seemed approproiate; however, I did not want students adding annotations
                     directly into our working digital edition of <cite class="title italic">Letters</cite>. Fortunately, one of the benefits of Scalar is that it is
                     easy to create additional books from existing material. This meant I could
                     create an independent edition of the text specifically for the students, which
                     would avoid potential problems of having someone accidentally change or remove
                     material from our original edition, or our having to eradicate material
                     afterwards. At the same time, I told the students that at the end of the process
                     I would review their annotations and those of the highest quality could be
                     incorporated into our edition, giving credit in the acknowledgements for their
                     contributions. Since Scalar assigns a number to each editor of a text, it would
                     be easy enough to determine the creator of any of the annotations. Thus, the
                     students were potentially participating in our professional project, doing
                     “real world” work instead of work simply for a class, and
                     possibly adding to their scholarly credentials. Having students do their own
                     annotations also introduced them to digital humanities skills and a tool,
                     Scalar, that could prove useful for their work later on, especially for those
                     who planned to pursue an advanced degree.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p35">35</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p35">For the first course in which I included the digital editing project, “Hybridity/ies in Early America,” I set parameters that
                     would make the work manageable and keep the stakes relatively low, especially
                     since it was my first attempt to have students use Scalar. Each of the students
                     in the course was assigned a 500- to 750-word selection of one of the letters to
                     annotate. I did not specify the exact number of annotations they had to create;
                     instead, they were advised to be as thorough as possible without overwhelming
                     the text with commentary. Because <cite class="title italic">Letters</cite> was to be
                     the final text in the assigned readings for the semester, we would read their
                     annotated version instead of the print edition I would normally have assigned.
                     Since each assigned segment would vary in terms of the number of annotations
                     that made sense, the students were advised that their work would be assessed on
                     the quality of the information provided and whether essential words, phrases, or
                     concepts had been explained and illustrated. They were also advised to think of
                     their audience as undergraduates as opposed to other graduate students as they
                     made decisions about what to annotate and how to do so. Finally, in another form
                     of communal engagement, I incorporated an in-class peer-review session, which
                     took place the week before we were to start reading their annotated version of
                     <cite class="title italic">Letters</cite>. Students were paired off to review
                     each other’s work and provide formal feedback: Were the annotations clear? Were
                     they factually and mechanically correct? Did all the links work? Had anything
                     important been left out? Students then had the subsequent week to make
                     revisions.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p36">36</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p36">In order to prepare the students for the project and give them as much time as
                     possible to complete their annotations, I conducted a Scalar workshop during the
                     second class meeting (we met once each week). During the workshop, each student
                     was asked to annotate the same passage from <cite class="title italic">Letters</cite>; we then compared the results to see what each person had
                     decided to annotate, why, and how, so they could see the results of individual
                     editorial choices. In addition to the hands-on workshop, I posted directions for
                     the basic Scalar functions — how to create a notecard, how to create a web link
                     — in the online “shell” for the course (Seton Hall University
                     uses Blackboard as its learning management system). I started each class session
                     by asking how the project was going and regularly included that question in my
                     weekly email updates to the class. Because they were all working on the same
                     text and with the same digital tool, I found that the students were able to help
                     one another much of the time. I would come to class and one of them would be
                     explaining how to credit a source or how to edit a video with Scalar. Thus, in
                     addition to learning the challenges of textual editing they were also learning
                     to work collaboratively, which is not the norm for literature scholars. In
                     addition to giving the students familiarity with one aspect of the editing
                     process and a useful web tool, my goal was to get them to think outside the box,
                     to use as many different resources as possible in their annotations, and to be
                     creative. They could include any material that would enrich the experience of
                     reading <cite class="title italic">Letters</cite> for others, but they also had to
                     think about how much they annotated, especially given the potentially crowded
                     viewing field in Scalar, with its notecard symbols and colored hypertext
                     links.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p37">37</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p37"> Besides showing the students how to use Scalar, I had an opportunity to provide
                     them with a professional perspective on scholarly editing. I invited Tiffany
                     Potter, who had edited the University of Toronto print edition of another text
                     we were reading for the course, <cite class="title italic">Ponteach, or the Savages of
                        America: A Tragedy</cite>, to a Skype interview with the class, which she
                     graciously accepted. The students were able to ask questions about her editing
                     process, about the kinds of challenges she had faced, and about how she had
                     dealt with some of the problems they were facing: how much to annotate, how much
                     to take for granted, and how best to explain complicated matters in a brief
                     space.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p38">38</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p38"> When the time finally arrived to read <cite class="title italic">Letters</cite> for
                     the course, the students were able to do two things: first, they were able to
                     better understand certain aspects of the text as a result of the annotations and
                     to comment on their efficacy; second, they were able to compare their reading of
                     the annotated as opposed to the unannotated parts of <cite class="title italic">Letters</cite> (since they had not annotated the text in its entirety),
                     which led to a productive discussion about the value of annotations and what
                     they added (or not) to the reading process. Having a personal stake in this
                     particular version of the text gave the students an additional investment in the
                     reading and discussion. The project evaluations (I administered a separate one
                     from the regular course evaluation) were uniformly positive. Some students were
                     frustrated with Scalar, as one would expect with any new technology tool, but
                     overall they were able to comment intelligently and even passionately about what
                     it meant to edit a text; most of them agreed that it was something they could
                     see themselves doing again. All of them agreed that they would never look at an
                     edited edition of a text in quite the same way again.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p39">39</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p39"> I incorporated a modified version of this project into a subsequent graduate
                     course in spring 2017, “From New Netherland to New
                     York.” The primary reason for the changes I made was that I had
                     several students in the class who had taken the prior early American graduate
                     class. In order to provide a different experience for them, in this later course
                     students were given the option to work on one of three different digital
                     projects, with the annotation of <cite class="title italic">Letters</cite> being one
                     of those. In this iteration I expanded the amount of text to be annotated.
                     Whereas the first class had been asked to annotate only a 500- to 750-word
                     section of <cite class="title italic">Letters</cite>, each student in the spring 2017
                     course who opted to do the annotation project was given a full letter to edit.
                     However, rather than having this second group of students work on a new,
                     “clean” version of the text, I had them use the same
                     version of <cite class="title italic">Letters</cite> that the spring 2016 students
                     had annotated, adding yet another dimension of collaboration. Their first
                     directive was to review the existing annotations made by the students in the
                     previous class and make sure they were factually correct and that all the links
                     worked; they were also required to document any changes they made and to explain
                     the reason for any changes using the Comment function in Scalar.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p40">40</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p40">Giving students options can increase their investment in the work they are asked
                     to do, and the <cite class="title italic">Letters</cite> project in the spring 2017
                     course bore this out. The students who opted for this project were exceptionally
                     committed to it and to the quality of the material they added; they were also
                     critical (in the best sense) of the annotations that had already been added by
                     students in the spring 2016 course. This kind of digital text project generates
                     a complex reading community consisting of 1) those who have read the text
                     without being involved in creating the annotations but who have benefitted from
                     the work others have done; 2) those who have commented on the annotations,
                     thereby influencing future editorial decisions; and 3) those who have actually
                     annotated the text. This latter group can then be divided yet again into those
                     who annotate the text at a particular moment in time (i.e. spring 2016 versus
                     spring 2017). Since <cite class="title italic">Letters</cite> was an edition in
                     progress, students had a chance to think critically about what others had chosen
                     to add to the text, change what was done previously, and then add to it
                     themselves. They thus became curators of the text as opposed to simply readers,
                     and, hopefully, readers with a different relationship to the material. Students
                     involved in this type of project also gain a new awareness of audience, those
                     for whom the annotations are being created, and have to ask of their work: What
                     do those readers need to know? How much information is too much? How can the
                     information best be conveyed? The result is a text that is interactive in the
                     best possible sense. The annotations reflect what students themselves thought it
                     would be useful to know as they and other students read, and it provides
                     information for readers like themselves about terms, historical references, and
                     cultural references. This graduate student edition remains a text that can be
                     added to and updated by other classes, providing a communal experience for
                     future students as well. Most importantly, being able to have students
                     participate in the annotation process gives them a different level of engagement
                     with the text, and it can ultimately — we hope — make them more active
                     participants in a scholarly community. Finally, if their annotations are
                     included in our “official” online edition of <cite class="title italic">Letters</cite>, the students can be understood to be
                     participating in an even larger community of readers and helping to
                     “author” a text that is organic in the way it is shaped
                     and develops over time.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Curating the Text: Students Create a Digital Critical Edition — Diana H.
                     Polley
                  </h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p41">41</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p41">As a result of the various ways in which our students had both used the
                     Crèvecoeur edition and participated in developing new digital content, I was
                     encouraged to consider yet another type of digital exercise as a way to explore
                     the possibilities of digital texts. As I was scheduled to teach an upper-level
                     American Literature Seminar in spring 2018, I decided to use the opportunity to
                     have my students engage in a semester-long project dedicated to constructing
                     their own short digital critical editions using Scalar. I chose not to have
                     students work on Crèvecoeur’s <cite class="title italic">Letters from an American
                        Farmer</cite> for several reasons. Most importantly, some students in my
                     seminar had taken the Early American Literature course I had taught that
                     previous fall when I piloted the Crèvecoeur digital edition. While the
                     Crèvecoeur edition would prove to be a good model for them, I was concerned that
                     if they were also asked to construct a digital edition of <cite class="title italic">Letters</cite>, there would be a temptation to replicate elements of the
                     edition we were producing; I wanted them to enjoy the freedom of a
                     “<span class="foreign i">tabula rasa.</span>” In addition, my
                     students were undergraduates, and I knew that the exercise itself would be
                     particularly challenging. Given the difficulty of Crèvecoeur’s writing, I felt
                     that choosing a more approachable early-American writer — both in form and theme
                     — would be a better option. Therefore, I assigned them, instead, a choice of
                     Benjamin Franklin essays. Over the course of fifteen weeks, my students were
                     asked to incorporate their own selection of key Franklin essays into a digital
                     edition that would include: digital annotations within the text (and related
                     ancillary materials, such as maps, word clouds, videos, etc.); a Note on the
                     Text and list of Emendations; an Introduction; and an Annotated Bibliography.
                     What I realized was how quickly I had to adjust my expectations, not so much in
                     terms of the digital but rather in terms of what my students understood about
                     more traditional concepts associated with the print form (e.g. the critical
                     edition and textual criticism). For example, while I was initially concerned
                     about teaching my students the Scalar platform, I found they picked up the
                     basics with ease. What they struggled with, however, was the very concept of
                     what a critical edition <em class="emph">is</em>. In an age where raw, unedited literary
                     texts are more readily available online, students seemed totally unfamiliar with
                     the model of the critical edition and the editor’s role in textual production.
                     Even more than the critical edition itself, students were utterly confused by
                     the study of textual criticism. The notion that what they read is not
                     automatically the “authoritative text,” that there may be
                     versions that are more or less authentic, that an editor may have emended the
                     text, and that as scholars their responsibility is to choose the most valid
                     textual source: all of these ideas seemed foreign to them. When we began working
                     on emendations, one student said: “Wait, I’m supposed to
                     ‘edit’ Benjamin Franklin? I can’t play God. I can’t do
                     this.” After repeated discussions about textual criticism, I was
                     relieved to hear this “aha!” moment: they were beginning to
                     realize the import of what I was asking them to do.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p42">42</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p42">Given my students’ confusion and their own uncertainty, asking them to be
                     “start-to-finish” curators of a digital edition was
                     particularly unnerving. The idea that my students would be using Yale’s Franklin
                     Collection (what we had chosen as the starting point for the
                     “authoritative text”), and then — as undergraduates —
                     emending, annotating, and digitally “publishing” that work,
                     highlighted the concerns Eggert notes in comparing print and digital publishing
                     forms and underscores the ease with which texts can be manipulated and endlessly
                     altered online. That said, having my students create their own editions from
                     beginning to end — creating a “Note on the Text,”
                     emending that text and constructing an “Emendations”
                     page, including an Introduction, providing annotations and hyperlinks, and
                     offering an Annotated Bibliography — allowed them the chance not only to
                     actively engage with and manipulate the text using the digital but also,
                     ironically, to understand the traditional models associated with the print form.
                     First, they were able to get a sense of the kind of detailed and pain-staking
                     work that goes into textual criticism and, more philosophically, to ask about
                     the ontological relationship between author and editor in the construction of
                     the text. Second, they were able to locate that “state of
                     prolonged anxiety” Eggert notes when trying to complete a print
                     edition [<a class="ref" href="#eggert2009">Eggert 2009</a>]. This project was not just another college
                     exercise. Their work mattered. And I made clear that because Scalar was an
                     “open source online and publishing platform” any
                     edition they constructed for my class they could ultimately make public and even
                     searchable for portfolios and jobs. They would be responsible for the work they
                     produced, beyond the classroom. In many ways, therefore, this digital assignment
                     gave students the opportunity to experience professionalism and the kind of
                     high-stakes perfectionism that Eggert associates with print rather than digital
                     publishing.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e956">[3]</a></div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Conclusion</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p43">43</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p43">Our various experiences with digital critical editions have made us even more
                     convinced of their value, whether for scholarship or for teaching or both. The
                     Crèvecoeur edition has proven beneficial for precisely those reasons we set out
                     to produce it: it would not only make <cite class="title italic">Letters from an
                        American Farmer</cite> available to students and a larger public audience,
                     but it would, as importantly, make the text <em class="emph">accessible</em> to that
                     audience. In the process, the digital medium would avoid current cost concerns
                     from the publisher and the buyer associated with the print market and open up
                     new ways for the reader to engage with the text and its context through
                     interactive technological tools.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p44">44</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p44">As our experience has revealed, however, there are several caveats when it comes
                     to starting a digital edition. For one, an edition needs a repository, a stable
                     place for the text to reside. While we have opted for Scalar, and have
                     confidence that the tool will be functioning for some time to come, there are
                     still risks that a non-profit platform like Scalar might lose its funding or
                     that platform support may be limited. Given this inherent lack of stability, it
                     is important to have a strategy for dealing with changes in tools, platforms,
                     and applications. It also seems critical that, moving forward, more repositories
                     are created for such editions. As discussed earlier, archives do exist, although
                     they seem either to be reserved for a single author (<cite class="title italic">The
                        William Blake Archive</cite>, for example) or the work of certain editors
                     (<cite class="title italic">Just Teach One</cite>, for example). No doubt there
                     are some clearinghouses that we simply could not locate. Ideally, however, any
                     repository for such digital editions will be easily located and easily
                     accessible by and for public readership, in much the way that archives for
                     unedited texts currently are, such as <cite class="title italic">Project
                        Gutenberg</cite> or the <cite class="title italic">Full Text Archive</cite>. To
                     be effective, we would argue, such repositories should also — by nature — be
                     open-source.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p45">45</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p45">Of course, the most important lesson we have learned from our own experience
                     creating a digital critical edition is the time it takes to engage in these
                     projects (and, of course, this might account for their limited availability).
                     Beyond helping to define and distinguish the medium, Sahle’s discussion of
                     digitized vs digital editions helps explain the complexity involved in their
                     creation; “browsing paths,”
                     “real hyperlinks,” and “integrated technical
                     tools” all require — for their survival — the interdependence of
                     other “real,” dynamic paths [<a class="ref" href="#sahle2016">Sahle 2016</a>]. The
                     nature of this interdependence means that the initial construction is
                     time-consuming, as is its upkeep. While the original text may remain stable, the
                     apparatus constructed does not and for this reason the result is a digital
                     edition that is forever in flux.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p46">46</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p46">This flux, what many critics note as its instability, is disconcerting; however,
                     it can also be seen as a pedagogical and scholarly boon. The analog text is
                     certainly more stable. Conversely, that stability comes at a price: it isn’t
                     long before the analog edition becomes outdated, and what was the definitive
                     version — with the most current theoretical essays and contextual material — is
                     now out of step with contemporary and even cutting edge critical thought. The
                     digital critical edition, because it can contain both past and present
                     materials, by contrast, represents a host of perspectives across time. The
                     reader can then see both where the text has been and where it is going, and
                     contribute to those new directions. Thus, while this lack of stability creates
                     fundamental challenges — increased initial time and continued labor and
                     maintenance — its mutability also helps to ensure its continued relevance.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p47">47</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p47">Finally, what we have found is the inherent communal nature — both for our
                     students and for ourselves — in these types of digital projects. Ideally, the
                     digital edition can reflect various perspectives. It can reflect the current
                     cultural moment, it can retain historical elements, and it can incorporate the
                     work of scholars at various stages in their learning. The edition incorporates,
                     as Sahle says, “integrative technical tools” and thus
                     is by its nature integrative; it integrates the perspectives of communities of
                     contexts and communities of scholars [<a class="ref" href="#sahle2016">Sahle 2016</a>]. Therefore, it
                     is not only important to consider how much time such a process will take but to
                     find good partners to work with. We were fortunate to have been brought together
                     at that 2011 NeMLA conference, and that our interest and work styles are so
                     similar. Not everyone starting a project will be so lucky. For now, we plan to
                     finish the Crèvecoeur edition, continue to explore future digital humanities
                     pedagogical opportunities with students, and look ahead to possible future
                     collaborative projects, perhaps housed at a site of our own making.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
               
            </div>
            
            <div id="notes">
               <h2>Notes</h2>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e227"><span class="noteRef lang en">[1] Since this time,
                     Harvard University Press has published (2013) a scholarly edition of <cite class="title italic">Letters from an American Farmer</cite> (accompanied by
                     thirteen additional Crèvecoeur pieces), edited and compiled by Dennis D.
                     Moore. While the edition has provided an important addition to Crèvecoeur
                     scholarship, as it was written for and marketed almost exclusively towards
                     academics and does not include ancillary teaching materials (e.g.
                     annotations, additional primary and secondary sources, and contextual
                     frameworks), the text was still not the type of traditional teaching edition
                     we refer to here.</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e631"><span class="noteRef lang en">[2] Although not necessarily
                     within the scope of this discussion, the question of how much academic
                     credit is given to these types of projects towards tenure and promotion is
                     an important one and is directly related to the feasibility of completing
                     such work. If the academy hopes to foster the growth of the digital
                     humanities, particularly these types of open source public projects, we need
                     to consider ways to integrate these projects into a peer-review process to
                     substantiate their academic and pedagogical value and give them credence for
                     tenure and promotion review.</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e956"><span class="noteRef lang en">[3] I am attaching here a link to an edition my student created
                     for the seminar and which is currently “published”” on
                     Scalar: <a href="http://scalar.usc.edu/works/mayberry/index" onclick="window.open('http://scalar.usc.edu/works/mayberry/index'); return false" class="ref">http://scalar.usc.edu/works/mayberry/index</a></span></div>
            </div>
            <div id="worksCited">
               <h2>Works Cited</h2>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="scalar">
                     <!-- close -->About Scalar</span> “About
                  Scalar.” The Alliance for Networking Visual Culture: <a href="scalar.me/anvc/scalar/" onclick="window.open('scalar.me/anvc/scalar/'); return false" class="ref">scalar.me/anvc/scalar/</a> (accessed 28
                  Dec. 2018).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="transcendentalism">
                     <!-- close -->Authors and Texts of American Transcendentalism</span> “Authors and Texts of American Transcendentalism.”
                  <cite class="title italic">American Transcendentalism Web</cite>: <a href="transcendentalism-legacy.tamu.edu/authors/index.html" onclick="window.open('transcendentalism-legacy.tamu.edu/authors/index.html'); return false" class="ref">transcendentalism-legacy.tamu.edu/authors/index.html</a> (accessed 28
                  Dec. 2018).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="crevecoeur2018">
                     <!-- close -->Crèvecoeur 2018</span> Crèvecoeur, J. <cite class="title italic">Letters from an American Farmer</cite>. (ed. M. Balkun and D.
                  Polley). Scalar: Alliance for Networking Digital Culture (2018): <a href="scalar.usc.edu/works/crevecoeur--letters-from-an-american-farmer/index" onclick="window.open('scalar.usc.edu/works/crevecoeur--letters-from-an-american-farmer/index'); return false" class="ref">scalar.usc.edu/works/crevecoeur--letters-from-an-american-farmer/index</a>
                  (accessed 28 Dec. 2018).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="deegan2009">
                     <!-- close -->Deegan and Sutherland 2009</span> Deegan, M. and
                  Sutherland, K. (2009). “Introduction.” In <cite class="title italic">Text Editing, Print and the Digital World</cite>. (ed. K.
                  Sutherland and M. Deegan), 1-9. New York: Routledge.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="medieval">
                     <!-- close -->Digital Library of Medieval Manuscripts</span> <cite class="title italic">Digital Library of Medieval Manuscripts</cite>. Johns Hopkins
                  Sheriden Libraries, <a href="dlmm.library.jhu.edu/en/digital-library-of-medieval-manuscripts/" onclick="window.open('dlmm.library.jhu.edu/en/digital-library-of-medieval-manuscripts/'); return false" class="ref">dlmm.library.jhu.edu/en/digital-library-of-medieval-manuscripts/</a>
                  (accessed 28 Dec. 2018).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="thoreau">
                     <!-- close -->Digital Thoreau</span> <cite class="title italic">Digital
                     Thoreau</cite>, Digital Thoreau, <a href="digitalthoreau.org/" onclick="window.open('digitalthoreau.org/'); return false" class="ref">digitalthoreau.org/</a> (accessed 28 Dec. 2018).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="eaves">
                     <!-- close -->Eaves, Essick, and Viscomi</span> Eaves, M., Essick, R. and
                  Viscomi, J. <cite class="title italic">The William Blake Archive</cite>: <a href="www.blakearchive.org/" onclick="window.open('www.blakearchive.org/'); return false" class="ref">www.blakearchive.org/</a> (accessed 28 Dec.
                  2018).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="eggert2009">
                     <!-- close -->Eggert 2009</span> Eggert, P. (2009). “The Book, the E-text and the ‘Work Site.’” In
                  <cite class="title italic">Text Editing, Print and the Digital World</cite>. (ed.
                  K. Sutherland and M. Deegan), 63-82. New York: Routledge.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="faherty">
                     <!-- close -->Faherty and White</span> Faherty, D. and White, E. ed.
                  <cite class="title italic">Just Teach One, Common-Place: The Journal of Early
                     American Life</cite>: <a href="jto.common-place.org/" onclick="window.open('jto.common-place.org/'); return false" class="ref">jto.common-place.org/</a> (accessed 28 Dec. 2018).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="folsom">
                     <!-- close -->Folsom and Price</span> Folsom, E. and Price, K. ed. <cite class="title italic">The Walt Whitman Archive</cite>, Center for Digital Research
                  in the Humanities at the University of Nebraska — Lincoln: <a href="whitmanarchive.org/" onclick="window.open('whitmanarchive.org/'); return false" class="ref">whitmanarchive.org/</a> (accessed 28 Dec.
                  2018).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="gold2012">
                     <!-- close -->Gold 2012</span> Gold, M. K. ed. (2012). <cite class="title italic">Debates in the Digital Humanities</cite>. Minneapolis: U of
                  Minnesota P.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="gold2016">
                     <!-- close -->Gold and Klein 2016</span> Gold, M. K. and Klein L. F. ed.
                  (2016). <cite class="title italic">Debates in the Digital Humanities</cite>.
                  Minneapolis: U of Minnesota P.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="gold2019">
                     <!-- close -->Gold and Klein 2019</span> Gold, M. K. and Klein L. F. ed
                  (2019). <cite class="title italic">Debates in the Digital Humanities</cite>.
                  Minneapolis: U of Minnesota P.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="hirsch2012">
                     <!-- close -->Hirsch 2012</span> Hirsch, B. (2012) “Introduction.” In <cite class="title italic">Digital Humanities Pedagogy:
                     Practices, Principles and Politics</cite> (ed. B. Hirsch), 3-30. UK: Open
                  Book Publishers.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="shakespeare">
                     <!-- close -->Internet Shakespeare Editions</span> <cite class="title italic">Internet Shakespeare Editions</cite>. Internet Shakespeare
                  Editions, 6 Feb. 2015, <a href="internetshakespeare.uvic.ca/" onclick="window.open('internetshakespeare.uvic.ca/'); return false" class="ref">internetshakespeare.uvic.ca/</a> (accessed 28 Dec. 2018).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="jabr2013">
                     <!-- close -->Jabr 2013</span> Jabr, F. (2013). “The
                  Reading Brain in the Digital Age: The Science of Paper versus
                  Screens.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Scientific American</cite> 11: <a href="www.scientificamerican.com/article/reading-paper-screens/" onclick="window.open('www.scientificamerican.com/article/reading-paper-screens/'); return false" class="ref">www.scientificamerican.com/article/reading-paper-screens/</a> (accessed
                  28 Dec. 2018).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="janeausten">
                     <!-- close -->Jane Austen Fiction Manuscripts</span> <cite class="title italic">Jane Austen Fiction Manuscripts</cite>. Jane Austen Fiction
                  Manuscripts. janeausten.ac.uk/index.html.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="jewell">
                     <!-- close -->Jewell</span> Jewell, A., ed. <cite class="title italic">Willa
                     Cather Archive</cite>, Center for Digital Research in the Humanities at the
                  University of Nebraska — Lincoln: <a href="cather.unl.edu/" onclick="window.open('cather.unl.edu/'); return false" class="ref">cather.unl.edu/</a> (accessed 28 Dec. 2018).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="kumar2015">
                     <!-- close -->Kumar, Kumar, and Parameshwarappa</span> Kumar, D. Vinay;
                  Kumar, B. T. Sampath; Parameshwarappa, D. R. ed. (2015). “URLs Link Rot: Implications for Electronic Publishing.”
                  <cite class="title italic">World Digital Libraries</cite>. 8 (1): 59-65. <a href="https://search-proquest-com.ezproxy.shu.edu/docview/1709560370?accountid=13793" onclick="window.open('https://search-proquest-com.ezproxy.shu.edu/docview/1709560370?accountid=13793'); return false" class="ref">https://search-proquest-com.ezproxy.shu.edu/docview/1709560370?accountid=13793</a>
                  (accessed 8 Feb. 2020).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="murphy2017">
                     <!-- close -->Murphy and Smith 2017</span> Murphy, E. C. and Smith, S.
                  R. ed. (2017) “Imagining the DH Undergraduate: Special Issue
                  in Undergraduate Education in DH,”
                  <cite class="title italic">Digital Humanities Quarterly</cite>, 11 (3): <a href="http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/11/3/000334/000334.html" onclick="window.open('http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/11/3/000334/000334.html'); return false" class="ref">http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/11/3/000334/000334.html</a>
                  (accessed 8 Feb. 2020).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="omeka">
                     <!-- close -->Omeka</span> “Omeka.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Omeka</cite>, Roy Rosenzweig Center for History and New
                  Media, <a href="omeka.org/" onclick="window.open('omeka.org/'); return false" class="ref">omeka.org/</a> (accessed 29 Oct. 2019).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="omekaclassic">
                     <!-- close -->Omeka Classic Directory</span> “Omeka Classic Directory.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Omeka</cite>, Roy Rosenzweig Center for History and New
                  Media, <a href="omeka.org/classic/directory/" onclick="window.open('omeka.org/classic/directory/'); return false" class="ref">omeka.org/classic/directory/</a> (accessed 29 Oct. 2019).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="openaccess">
                     <!-- close -->Open Access Directory</span> “Open
                  Access Directory.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Open Access Directory</cite>, Simmons University <a href="oad.simmons.edu/oadwiki/Main_Page" onclick="window.open('oad.simmons.edu/oadwiki/Main_Page'); return false" class="ref">oad.simmons.edu/oadwiki/Main_Page</a> (accessed 29 Oct. 2019).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="pierazzo2015">
                     <!-- close -->Pierazzo 2015</span> Pierazzo, E. (2015) <cite class="title italic">Digital Scholarly Editing: Theories, Models and
                     Methods</cite>. New York: Routledge.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="potter2010">
                     <!-- close -->Potter 2010</span> Potter, T. ed. (2010) <cite class="title italic">Ponteach, or the Savages of America: A Tragedy</cite>.
                  Toronto: U of Toronto P.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="pressman2013">
                     <!-- close -->Pressman and Swanstrom 2013</span> Pressman, J. and
                  Swanstrom, L. ed. (2013). “Introduction.”
                  “The Literary And/As the Digital Humanities”
                  <cite class="title italic">DHQ</cite> 7 (1): <a href="digitalhumanities.org:8081/dhq/vol/7/1/000154/000154.html" onclick="window.open('digitalhumanities.org:8081/dhq/vol/7/1/000154/000154.html'); return false" class="ref">digitalhumanities.org:8081/dhq/vol/7/1/000154/000154.html</a>. (accessed
                  8 Feb. 2020).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="gutenberg">
                     <!-- close -->Project Gutenberg</span> <cite class="title italic">Project
                     Gutenberg</cite>. Project Gutenberg. <a href="www.gutenberg.org/wiki/Main_Page" onclick="window.open('www.gutenberg.org/wiki/Main_Page'); return false" class="ref">www.gutenberg.org/wiki/Main_Page</a> (accessed 19 Dec. 2018).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="sahle2016">
                     <!-- close -->Sahle 2016</span> Sahle, P. (2016). “What is a Digital Scholarly Edition?” In <cite class="title italic">Digital Scholarly Editing: Theories and Practices</cite> (Ed. M. James and
                  E. Pierazzo), 19-40. UK: Open Book.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="shillingsburg2009">
                     <!-- close -->Shillingsburg 2009</span> Shillingsburg, P.
                  (2009). “How Literary Works Exist: Convenient Scholarly
                  Editions”
                  <cite class="title italic">DHQ</cite> 3 (3): <a href="digitalhumanities.org:8081/dhq/vol/3/3/000054/000054.html" onclick="window.open('digitalhumanities.org:8081/dhq/vol/3/3/000054/000054.html'); return false" class="ref">digitalhumanities.org:8081/dhq/vol/3/3/000054/000054.html</a> (accessed 8
                  Feb. 2020).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="sutherland2009">
                     <!-- close -->Sutherland 2009</span> Sutherland, K. (2009). “Being Critical: Paper-based Editing and the Digital
                  Environment.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Text Editing, Print and the Digital World</cite>. (Eds. K.
                  Sutherland and M. Deegan), 13-25. New York: Routledge.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="wasteland">
                     <!-- close -->The Wasteland</span> <cite class="title italic">The Wasteland:
                     T.S. Elliot’s Masterpiece</cite>. TouchPress (2017): <a href="thewasteland.touchpress.com/" onclick="window.open('thewasteland.touchpress.com/'); return false" class="ref">thewasteland.touchpress.com/</a>
                  (accessed 28 Dec. 2018).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="whitley2018">
                     <!-- close -->Whitley and Weidman 2018</span> Whitley, E. and Weidman,
                  R. (2018). <cite class="title italic">The Vault at Pfaff’s: An Archive of Art and
                     Literature by the Bohemians of Antebellum New York</cite>, Lehigh
                  University: <a href="pfaffs.web.lehigh.edu/" onclick="window.open('pfaffs.web.lehigh.edu/'); return false" class="ref">pfaffs.web.lehigh.edu/</a>
                  (accessed 28 Dec. 2018).
               </div>
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar"><a href="#">Preview</a>  |  <span style="color: grey">XML</span> |  <a href="#" onclick="javascript:window.print();" title="Click for print friendly version">Print Article</a></div>
         </div>
      </div>
   </body>
</html>