<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
      <title>[PREVIEW] DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly: Sound and Digital Humanities: reflecting on a DHSI
         course
         
      </title>
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_screen.css" media="screen" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_print.css" media="print" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" /><style type="text/css">
        #mainContent {
          float: none;
          padding-top: 2em;
          padding-left: 4em;
          padding-right: 4em;
          margin-left: 225px;
           
        }</style></head>
   <body>
      <div id="mainContent">
         <div xmlns:dhqBiblio="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/ns/biblio" class="DHQarticle">
            <div id="pubInfo">Preview<br />Volume 010 Number 1
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar">
               <form id="taporware" action="get">
                  <div><a href="/dhq/preview/index.html">Preview</a>
                      | 
                     <a rel="external" href="/dhq/vol/10/1/000239.xml">XML</a>
                     
                     | 
                     		   Discuss
                     			(<a href="/dhq/vol/10/1/000239/000239.html#disqus_thread" data-disqus-identifier="000239">
                        				Comments
                        			</a>)
                     
                  </div>
               </form>
            </div>
            
            <div class="DHQheader">
               
               
               
               
               <h1 class="articleTitle">Sound and Digital Humanities: reflecting on a DHSI
                  course
               </h1>
               
               <div class="author"><span style="color: grey">John F. Barber</span> &lt;<a href="mailto:jfbarber_at_eaze_dot_net" onclick="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('jfbarber_at_eaze_dot_net'); return false;" onkeypress="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('jfbarber_at_eaze_dot_net'); return false;">jfbarber_at_eaze_dot_net</a>&gt;, The Creative Media &amp; Digital Culture Program, Washington
                  State University Vancouver
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               <span class="Z3988" title="url_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;rft_val_fmt=info%3Aofi%2Ffmt%3Akev%3Amtx%3Ajournal&amp;rfr_id=info%3Asid%2Fzotero.org%3A2&amp;rft.genre=article&amp;rft.atitle=Sound%20and%20Digital%20Humanities%3A%20reflecting%20on%20a%20DHSI%20course&amp;rft.jtitle=Digital%20Humanities%20Quarterly&amp;rft.stitle=DHQ&amp;rft.issn=1938-4122&amp;rft.date=&amp;rft.volume=010&amp;rft.issue=1&amp;rft.aulast=Barber&amp;rft.aufirst=John F.&amp;rft.au=John F.%20Barber"> </span></div>
            
            
            <div id="DHQtext">
               
               
               <div id="abstract">
                  <h2>Abstract</h2>
                  
                  <p>The creation and utilization of sound as a methodology for information
                     representation is intriguing for Digital Humanities research, teaching, and
                     practice. However, scholars, researchers, and artists may lack appreciation
                     and/or ability for using sound(s) to enhance or ground their research /
                     presentations. In response, the author created and taught a week-long course,
                     "Sound of / in Digital Humanities," offered
                     during the 2014 Digital Humanities Summer Institute. This essay reflects on the
                     course, its planning, implementation, and outcomes and offers insight into the
                     role sound might play in the research, communication, and consumption of Digital
                     Humanities. 
                  </p>
                  
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Introduction</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p1">1</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p1">This essay discusses the "Sound and Digital
                     Humanities" course offered during the week-long 2014 Digital
                     Humanities Summer Institute (DHSI) at the University of Victoria, Victoria,
                     British Columbia, Canada, 2-6 June. The focus of this course was promoting sound
                     and aural representation of information in Digital Humanities (DH) research,
                     teaching, and practice.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p2">2</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p2">This course evolved from previous experience at DHSI. During the summers of 2012
                     and 2013, I collaborated with colleagues from the Creative Media &amp; Digital
                     Culture faculty at Washington State University Vancouver to provide a course
                     focusing on "Creating Digital Humanities Projects for the
                     Mobile Environment." Participants were, I observed, quick to
                     visualize information in their apps using video, graphics, or animation. Sound,
                     however, was often overlooked, primarily because participants lacked insight as
                     to how it might be used.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e202">[1]</a></div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p3">3</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p3">Based on that observation, and a belief that sound plays an important role in
                     arts and humanities research and scholarship, I proposed a course titled "Sound and Digital Humanities" to be offered during DHSI
                     2014.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e212">[2]</a></div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p4">4</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p4">This essay reflects on the course, its planning, implementation, and outcomes. I
                     first situate sound as a worthy context for DH work, one that, unfortunately,
                     has been under explored. Next, I outline, from a practice orientation, basic
                     assumptions, and from them, daily goals, objectives, activities, and outcomes
                     for this week-long course. The following section takes a more theoretical tone
                     as I provide an overview of ideological approaches to sound and sound studies.
                     This combination of theory and practice, subjective and objective, I hope, will
                     be illustrative of my approach to this course, and provide a case study for
                     others seeking a similar approach for their own DH research/work. My conclusion
                     suggests that sound provides interesting opportunities for DH research,
                     scholarship, and practice.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Context</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p5">5</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p5">DH is an area of interdisciplinary, collaborative research and practice at the
                     intersection of digital computing technologies and the disciplines of the
                     humanities. The hybrid approach of DH involves combining digitized or
                     born-digital materials, and methodologies from disciplines such as art, art
                     history, archaeology, cultural studies, literary criticism, philology, and
                     others, with computing tools like data mining and/or visualization, digital
                     mapping and/or publishing, information retrieval, and statistics. Practices
                     include analysis, coding, curation, criticism, databases, digitization, document
                     analysis, geographical information systems, information digitization /
                     visualization, multimedia publications, pedagogy, project management, text
                     encoding, processing, and visualization. The results influence creation,
                     dissemination, preservation, research, and teaching activities. The desired
                     outcome is to answer or challenge existing research paradigms, as well as
                     suggest new research questions and approaches. This essay brings sound into the
                     mix.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p6">6</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p6">"Sound" is the name we give our physical, subjective experience of acoustic
                     energy — a sequence of pressure variations — that travel through a medium (air,
                     gas, water) to our ears. Sound may have a variety of sources but is usually one
                     object moving over or striking another, thus creating vibrations. For example,
                     air passing over human vocal cords and then modulated by tongue, teeth, mouth,
                     and lips produces the sounds we know as speech. Sound travels in all directions
                     from its source in waves and is heard (experienced as sound) when it interacts
                     with appropriate listening devices, like human ears. The higher the energy
                     involved with its production, the louder the sound is perceived. But, unless
                     preserved in some manner, all sound is ephemeral, disappearing soon after its
                     creation.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p7">7</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p7">Regarding sound, scholar Bruce R. Smith, discussing his research of sounds
                     associated with London, circa 1600, notes many sounds, unless they have been
                     recorded, are no longer available for study, or are difficult to study. For
                     example, the only source for studying historical speech accents might be
                     impressions / depictions written by authors, travelers, or journalists [<a class="ref" href="#smith2003">Smith 2003</a>].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p8">8</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p8">DH scholars have long been able to discuss developments in film and television
                     because of the ability to situate commentary alongside or directly within visual
                     media as it unfolds over time. But, the ability to do the same with sound has
                     not been widely possible until the introduction of SoundCloud in 2007. According
                     to Jonathan Sterne, as they become more widely available, evolving affordances
                     like looping an audio file; setting begin and end points; setting the volume;
                     tagging, commenting, annotating; close listening (via skipping around, speeding
                     up, slowing down, scrubbing, freezing); and comparing different channel formats
                     will increase opportunities for sound-focused scholarship [<a class="ref" href="#sterne2011">Sterne 2011</a>].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p9">9</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p9">More specifically, Annie Murray and Jared Wiercinski describe how listening and
                     annotation are essential endeavors for DH scholars undertaking literary
                     criticism on poetry sound recordings. They present a methodology for designing a
                     web-based sound archive for literary criticism and propose features and
                     functionalities that facilitate this criticism [<a class="ref" href="#murray2014">Murray and Wiercinski 2014</a>].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p10">10</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p10">Despite such pioneering efforts, Allison Whitney says DH scholarship, with its
                     embrace of images, animation, video, or text as image for research and
                     information presentation, is biased toward visuals. Sound is largely overlooked
                     [<a class="ref" href="#whitney2008">Whitney 2008</a>]. Part of the reason for this may be technical,
                     as noted by Sterne, previously. Another factor may hinge on what Tara McPherson
                     notes as DH's historical focus on the use of digital media / technology to
                     critique / analyze print. Less attention, she says, has been given to scholars'
                     ability to shift from commenting about new media and technologies to
                     constructing arguments with and through them [<a class="ref" href="#mcpherson2009">McPherson 2009</a>].
                     This will change, however, with the development and availability of tools that
                     facilitate the comparison and mining of complex information source relationships
                     and their multimodal publication. eBooks provide interesting opportunities, as
                     do web content development tools like WordPress and Scalar.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e256">[3]</a></div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p11">11</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p11">Sound(s) should facilitate such intersections and comparisons as well. Imagine
                     Smith being able to compare voice dialects using embedded sound files. Or,
                     another DH researcher using sound(s) of speech to mark or define boundaries
                     between research areas — between class, gender, or race relations, for example.
                     Aural artifacts might include soundscapes, sound maps, sound collages, and
                     remixes; digital storytelling (perhaps in transmedia projects); aural and oral
                     histories / biographies / documentaries; curated exhibitions / installations /
                     performances / broadcasts; or as stand alone artifacts (embedded sound,
                     podcasts, web-based radio, archives, curated collections). However, DH scholars
                     may lack appreciation and/or ability for using sound(s) to enhance or ground
                     their research / presentations. In response, I proposed the "Sound and Digital Humanities" course to introduce, explore, and
                     investigate how sounds might be utilized in DH research and information
                     presentation.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Assumptions</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p12">12</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p12">DHSI convenes colleagues from the arts, humanities, library, archives, and other
                     communities to share ideas and develop skills using digital, computational, and
                     network technologies for teaching, researching, sharing, creating, and
                     preserving in their disciplines. The atmosphere is informal, friendly, and
                     community-based. As noted, during summers 2012 and 2013, I helped facilitate
                     courses in building DH applications for mobile environments. From this previous
                     experience, I felt I could establish some descriptors for potential course
                     participants. For example, participants would 
                     <ul class="list">
                        <li class="item">Be post-graduate faculty, librarians, and graduate students.</li>
                        <li class="item">Align their own research interests with sound. However, their desired
                           course outcomes might not be finalized.
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">Differ regarding theory vs. practice. Some would want only or
                           primarily to theorize sound. Others would want a theoretical framework
                           but also an opportunity to engage in creative practices of recording,
                           editing, and manipulating sound for research and presentation. Others
                           would want only to learn what could be done with sound in order to
                           inspire future projects.
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">Begin with only rudimentary sound design / editing skills. Or none.
                           They might wish to learn sufficient skills for use in their classes, or
                           to inform their own work(s).
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">Appreciate some course structure, but more so, flexibility to explore
                           topics as they arose.
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">Desire to complete the course feeling they gained new knowledge and
                           opportunity for research, presentation, or creative activity in the arts
                           and humanities.
                        </li>
                     </ul>
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Course Goals and Objectives</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p13">13</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p13">Based on these assumptions, my course, as planned, would assume no previous
                     knowledge of recording and/or editing sound files. It would survey different
                     sound genres and their use in DH projects. The course would be flexible, able to
                     adapt to the participants' projects, and allow time for workshops and hands-on,
                     learning-by-doing, collaborative learning experiences. As course facilitator, I
                     outlined goals, objectives, activities, discussion, and workshops for each day
                     of the course.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">Day 1</h2>
                     
                     <div class="div div2">
                        
                        <h3 class="head">Goals</h3>
                        
                        <div class="ptext">
                           <ul class="list">
                              <li class="item">Understand the broad and important applications of sound to
                                 various DH endeavors.
                              </li>
                              <li class="item">Understand basic equipment needs / configurations for sound work
                                 in DH.
                              </li>
                              <li class="item">Understand basics of sound recording and editing, and how to build
                                 on those basics.
                              </li>
                           </ul>
                        </div>
                        
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="div div2">
                        
                        <h3 class="head">Objectives</h3>
                        
                        <div class="ptext">
                           <ul class="list">
                              <li class="item">Introduce participants to sound production / editing.</li>
                           </ul>
                        </div>
                        
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="div div2">
                        
                        <h3 class="head">Projects</h3>
                        
                        <div class="ptext">
                           <ul class="list">
                              <li class="item">Learn and apply basic sound editing and manipulation skills to
                                 reduce an hour-long radio drama into ten minutes or less, while
                                 maintaining narrative continuity.
                              </li>
                              <li class="item">Plan the overarching structure of a collaborative sound
                                 composition illustrating the breadth and richness of sounds for the
                                 DHSI-wide show-and-tell session scheduled for the final day.
                              </li>
                           </ul>
                        </div>
                        
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">Day 2</h2>
                     
                     <div class="div div2">
                        
                        <h3 class="head">Goals</h3>
                        
                        <div class="ptext">
                           <ul class="list">
                              <li class="item">Understand that sound provides a place for embodied social and
                                 cultural traces through discussion of a theoretical framework for
                                 using sound.
                              </li>
                              <li class="item">Understand that various forms of auditory culture can provide
                                 foundations for defined areas of DH practices.
                              </li>
                           </ul>
                        </div>
                        
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="div div2">
                        
                        <h3 class="head">Objectives</h3>
                        
                        <div class="ptext">
                           <ul class="list">
                              <li class="item">Appreciate principles of fair use (fair dealing in Canada) for DH
                                 projects.
                              </li>
                              <li class="item">Appreciate other best practices associated with the use of
                                 sound(s) for scholarship and creative endeavors.
                              </li>
                           </ul>
                        </div>
                        
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="div div2">
                        
                        <h3 class="head">Projects</h3>
                        
                        <div class="ptext">
                           <ul class="list">
                              <li class="item">Examine resources and discuss applications. Continue work on both
                                 individual and collaborative sound projects.
                              </li>
                           </ul>
                        </div>
                        
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">Day 4</h2>
                     
                     <div class="div div2">
                        
                        <h3 class="head">Goals</h3>
                        
                        <div class="ptext">
                           <ul class="list">
                              <li class="item">Understand different ways in which sonic DH projects can be
                                 packaged and distributed.
                              </li>
                           </ul>
                        </div>
                        
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="div div2">
                        
                        <h3 class="head">Objectives</h3>
                        
                        <div class="ptext">
                           <ul class="list">
                              <li class="item">Understand basic concepts of streaming, on demand, downloading,
                                 and podcasting as ways to share sound-based/-augmented DH
                                 projects.
                              </li>
                           </ul>
                        </div>
                        
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">Day 5</h2>
                     
                     <div class="div div2">
                        
                        <h3 class="head">Goals</h3>
                        
                        <div class="ptext">
                           <ul class="list">
                              <li class="item">Reflect on and evaluate the role of sound(s) in DH
                                 projects.
                              </li>
                              <li class="item">Reflect on and evaluate course learning opportunities.</li>
                           </ul>
                        </div>
                        
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="div div2">
                        
                        <h3 class="head">Objectives</h3>
                        
                        <div class="ptext">
                           <ul class="list">
                              <li class="item">Discuss future use of course knowledge in individual sound-based
                                 DH projects.
                              </li>
                           </ul>
                        </div>
                        
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="div div2">
                        
                        <h3 class="head">Project</h3>
                        
                        <div class="ptext">
                           <ul class="list">
                              <li class="item">Engage in the DHSI-wide show and tell session.</li>
                           </ul>
                        </div>
                        
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Example Course Outcomes</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p14">14</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p14">Outcomes from this course went far beyond my expectations. Where many course
                     participants arrived with an individual project, each left with a shared and
                     collaboratively constructed body of knowledge regarding the theory and
                     application of sound-augmented DH projects. Specifically, participants could
                     
                     <ul class="list">
                        <li class="item">Effectively theorize the use of sound as a medium for experiencing and
                           communicating information in DH projects.
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">Manipulate and edit sound files for presentation in DH
                           projects.
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">Appreciate different categorization, archival, and curatorial systems
                           / practices regarding sound(s) in DH projects.
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">Effectively use different forms of sound distribution for DH
                           projects.
                        </li>
                     </ul>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p15">15</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p15">A brief discussion of each day's outcome(s) follows.</div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">Day 1</h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p16">16</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p16">As the basis for the sound editing project, participants downloaded a digital
                        sound file of the 30 October 1938 radio drama broadcast, <cite class="title italic">The War of the Worlds</cite>. Directed by and starring
                        Orson Welles and The Mercury Theatre on the Air, this is, arguably, the most
                        influential radio broadcast of all time.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e523">[4]</a> The challenge was to edit this hour-long performance into
                        a coherent narrative ten minutes in length, or less. Course participants
                        discussed the overall structure of their edited sound compositions, and how
                        their particular perspectives on sound (many participants were working with
                        collections of recorded poetry readings / poet interviews) contributed to
                        the resulting artifact.
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">Day 2</h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p17">17</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p17">As a starting point for discussing auditory culture, participants considered
                        Steven Feld's attention to "the primacy of sound as a modality of knowing and
                        being in the world"
                         [<a class="ref" href="#feld2003">Feld 2003</a>, 226]. This opened our discussion to different types of listening: "deep" or "agile"
                        listening proposed by Michael Bull and Les Beck, acousmatic listening
                        proposed by Pierre Schaeffer, and ambient listening proposed by Brian Eno.
                        More information in the "Theoretical Framework"
                        section, below.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p18">18</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p18">Sound, we agreed, provides a place in which embodied social and cultural
                        traces can be carried, often without the awareness of their bearers [<a class="ref" href="#schafer1977">Schafer 1977</a>]. By carefully considering sound, however, we
                        open new ways of thinking about and appreciating the social experience,
                        memory, time, and place — the auditory culture — of sound [<a class="ref" href="#bull2003">Bull and Beck 2003</a>, 12].
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p19">19</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p19">As specific examples of auditory culture, we discussed aural / oral history,
                        biography / documentary, and sound archives. Aural history is a method of
                        gathering and preserving historical information through recorded sounds
                        which provide context, background, and deep, rich information about the
                        subject. Aural histories may include voice recordings regarding some
                        historic event or way of life, but they are primarily composed of
                        environmental / mechanical sounds.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p20">20</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p20">With oral history, the primary audio emphasis is the human voice as a speaker
                        tells her eye witness account, experience(s), or opinion(s) of past events /
                        ways of life. The use of video recording includes gesture as part of the
                        communication, thus expanding oral history beyond verbal form.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p21">21</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p21">Audio biographies and documentaries may provide additional access to cultural
                        and historical information contained in or provided by sound(s). The
                        remainder of the day's discussion and exploration centered on the efforts of
                        sound archives to archive and curate sound(s), either broadly defined or
                        specifically focused. Participants explored sound archives online and
                        discussed their relative affordances in light of their own sound-based DH
                        projects.
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">Day 3</h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p22">22</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p22">The focus of this day's class was rights associated with audio files, and how
                        these might affect their utilization in DH projects. Copyright, fair use,
                        and creative commons were at the forefront of our discussions. The Statute
                        of Anne (1710) established principles of an author's ownership of copyright
                        and provided a fixed term of protection for copyrighted works (fourteen
                        years). Since then, U.S. law has been revised to broaden the scope of
                        copyright, change the term of copyright protection, and address new
                        technologies. Section 107, Limitations on Exclusive Rights: Fair Use of The
                        Copyright Act of 1976 provides exemptions, in certain contexts, to the
                        exclusive rights built into the copyright law. Participants from Canada and
                        the United Kingdom added their understanding of copyright considerations in
                        their home countries, thus broadening the discussion. Creative Commons (CC)
                        provides a model for how creative works might be shared. Essentially,
                        Creative Commons licenses allow photographers, artists, educators, and
                        others to license their work in advance as content for creative endeavors by
                        others. We discussed these implications for course participants' individual
                        projects.
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">Day 4</h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p23">23</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p23">Making sound files available for listening and further DH research /
                        presentation is important. <em class="emph">Streaming</em> provides content on a
                        continuous basis. Listeners can tune in or out at will, as with traditional
                        radio broadcasting. But, they can also pause, stop, and start the program
                        stream at will. The stream is ongoing and particular portions cannot be
                        heard again unless they are recorded in some manner.
                        <em class="emph">Downloading</em> involves transferring a sound file from a
                        remote computer to a local computer where it can be saved and listened to
                        whenever desired. <em class="emph">Podcasting</em> refers generally to an audio
                        episode, self-contained, sometimes augmented by text or visuals, that can be
                        either streamed or downloaded. <em class="emph">On demand</em> speaks to sharing an
                        audio file only when it is needed or desired by the listener. The listener
                        evokes the playback process by interacting with an audio player. The audio
                        file plays through to conclusion and then, since it is embedded in the
                        interface, can be evoked repeatedly.
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">Day 5</h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p24">24</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p24">Course participants contributed samples from their individual or course
                        projects, audio biographies, found sounds, field recordings, oral histories,
                        poetry, and creative sound arts, to a collaborative project that was shared
                        with others during a DHSI-wide final-day show-and-tell session. The sound
                        file they created as a course artifact was a narrative of human endeavor
                        that, like DH, is deep and rich, broad and diverse.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e618">[5]</a></div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Theoretical Framework</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p25">25</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p25">Perhaps an overarching course outcome would be the realization that even in the
                     visual context of contemporary life, sound remains a powerful sensory input, and
                     a fundamental factor in many arenas of inquiry for DH: speech, writing,
                     literature, reading, narrative, storytelling, and listening.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e635">[6]</a></div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p26">26</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p26">Regarding the power of sound as a sensory input, film editor and sound designer
                     Walter Murch says sound is the earliest sensory stimulus available to humans,
                     switching on "four-and-a-half months after we are
                     conceived." Newborns rely predominately on hearing before their
                     visual acuity has stabilized [<a class="ref" href="#murch2005">Murch 2005</a>].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p27">27</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p27">Communications theorist Marshall McLuhan echoes this point when he argues sound
                     provided the first frame of reference through which humankind attempted to
                     create and communicate a world view. McLuhan, with his son and collaborator,
                     Eric, describes two spaces, acoustic and visual, in which humankind has
                     contextualized itself with different results: "Acoustic space . . . is spherical, discontinuous,
                     non-homogeneous, resonant, and dynamic. Visual space is structured as
                     static, abstract figure minus a ground; acoustic space is a flux in
                     which figure and ground rub against and transform each other"
                      [<a class="ref" href="#mcluhan1988">McLuhan and McLuhan 1988</a>, 33].<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e658">[7]</a></div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p28">28</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p28">Acoustic space is a world awash in sounds. With aural information emerging from
                     all directions, and with no opportunity to shut off or organize the constant
                     stream of sound, pre-writing humankind, the only to experience acoustic space,
                     according to McLuhan, perceived its world as both surrounding and inclusive, a
                     permeable extension of itself, and they of it [<a class="ref" href="#levinson1999">Levinson 1999</a>, 5–6].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p29">29</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p29">For McLuhan, "The 'content' of any medium is
                     always another medium. The content of writing is speech, just as the
                     written word is the content of print, and print is the content of the
                     telegraph. If it is asked, 'What is the content of speech?,' it is
                     necessary to say, 'It is an actual process of thought, which is in
                     itself nonverbal'"
                      [<a class="ref" href="#mcluhan1964">McLuhan 1964</a>, 23–24]. Speech, as the expression of thoughts and feelings by articulate sounds,
                     incorporates abstract thought and extends its ability to explain and/or
                     characterize human agency and situation.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p30">30</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p30">Speech tamed the acoustic wilderness by translating abstract thought into
                     communicable ideas. Storytellers produced explanations for the sounds in
                     acoustic space and wove them into larger narratives that helped explain the
                     presence and purpose of humankind. Orality provided a means to preserve and
                     share cultural histories and memories, a human tendency documented by Joseph
                     Campbell who investigated the reenactment of myths as ritualistic participatory
                     drama, often involving narrative, music, and/or other sound sources, by cultures
                     around the world [<a class="ref" href="#campbell1949">Campbell 1949</a>].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p31">31</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p31">Alphabets and writing (and printing and reading), in turn, by visualizing its
                     sounds, incorporate and preserve speech while extending its reach beyond the
                     transmission range of the human voice. With the advent of writing, during the
                     height of ancient Greece, speech was visualized, replacing the speaker’s voice
                     with text. Printing and distribution of texts, encouraged humankind to see and
                     read (literally and figuratively) the world as a series of discrete pieces,
                     letters and words strung like beads on a linear continuum running from the past,
                     through the present, toward the future. As this emphasis on visualization
                     continued with film, television, and the World Wide Web, the visual was elevated
                     as the primary sensory input. Sound was relegated to a secondary, augmenting
                     role to the visual.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e719">[8]</a></div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p32">32</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p32">However, even as new visual media replaced / extended the older orality, they
                     incorporated its content: spoken narrative, storytelling, drama, and literature,
                     and various literary practices associated with their creation and consumption.
                     Thus, speech (as sound), with its origins in abstract thought and presentation,
                     is the oldest medium and the most prevalent form of human communication. It
                     claims a presence in most all media that follow [<a class="ref" href="#levinson1999">Levinson 1999</a>, 1981]. As James O’Donnell notes, "the manuscript was first conceived to be no more than a
                     prompt-script for the spoken word, a place to look to find out what to
                     say . . . to produce the audible word"
                      [<a class="ref" href="#odonnell1988">O'Donnell 1988</a>, 54].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p33">33</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p33">Sound, despite its secondary relation to visual, still conveys deep, rich
                     information capable of prompting cognitive and emotional responses. McLuhan
                     likens sound to a "subliminal echo chamber" capable
                     of evoking memories/associations long forgotten or ignored [<a class="ref" href="#mcluhan1964">McLuhan 1964</a>, 264].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p34">34</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p34">According to Smith, sound is pervasive. Most humans, he says, "live immersed in a world of sound . . . sound is at
                     once the most forceful stimulus that human beings experience, and the
                     most evanescent"
                      [<a class="ref" href="#smith2003">Smith 2003</a>, 127, 128]. Most academic disciplines are vision-based, he continues, not only in
                     the materials they study, but in the theoretical models they deploy to interpret
                     those materials. Sound, says Smith, as an object of study, has been neglected.
                     This is unfortunate, he concludes, as knowing the world through sound is
                     fundamentally different from knowing the world through vision [<a class="ref" href="#smith2003">Smith 2003</a>, 129]. Stephen Feld concurs, noting "the primacy of sound as a modality of knowing and being
                     in the world"
                      [<a class="ref" href="#feld2003">Feld 2003</a>, 226]. In short, sound provides a place in which embodied social and cultural
                     traces can be carried, often without the awareness of their bearers [<a class="ref" href="#schafer1977">Schafer 1977</a>].
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Listening</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p35">35</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p35">Experiencing sound, and the information it carries, involves listening, the
                     conscious processing of auditory stimuli. Gary Ferrington likens listening to
                     "theater of the mind," where every individual
                     listener is her own dramaturge [<a class="ref" href="#ferrington1994">Ferrington 1994</a>]. Alan Hall notes
                     listening opens a "portal through which a deeper, often inarticulate,
                     consciousness can be glimpsed"
                      [<a class="ref" href="#hall2010">Hall 2010</a>, 99]. Such glimpses may promote imagination, interaction, even immersion. Tim
                     Crook says sound very effectively prompts life from little details "seen" in the mind's eye [<a class="ref" href="#crook1999">Crook 1999</a>, 8].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p36">36</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p36">Michael Bull and Les Beck suggest by considering sound we open new ways of
                     thinking about and appreciating the social experience, memory, time, and place —
                     the auditory culture — of sound [<a class="ref" href="#bull2003">Bull and Beck 2003</a>, 12]. They
                     advocate "deep listening" or "agile listening," both of which involve "attuning our ears to listen again to the multiple layers of meaning
                     potentially embedded in the same sound." Deep listening, they say,
                     also involves "practices of dialogue and procedures for investigation,
                     transposition and interpretation"
                      [<a class="ref" href="#bull2003">Bull and Beck 2003</a>, 3–4]. They argue several outcomes from deep listening. 
                     <ul class="list">
                        <li class="item">Sound makes us rethink our social experience, its meaning, nature, and
                           significance.
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">Sound makes us rethink our relation to community.</li>
                        <li class="item">Sound makes us rethink our relation to others, ourselves, and the
                           spaces and places we inhabit.
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">Sound makes us rethink our relationship to power [Bull and Beck 2003,
                           3-4].
                        </li>
                     </ul>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p37">37</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p37">In addition to deep or profound listening, we might also consider acousmatic,
                     ambient, or profound listening. Sound artist Francisco López uses the term
                     "profound listening" to denote listening without
                     constraints in order to explore and affirm all the information inside any sound
                     [<a class="ref" href="#l%C3%B3pez2004">López 2004</a>, 82–83].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p38">38</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p38">Ambient listening, as defined by Brian Eno, principal innovator of ambient music,
                     is an accompaniment to life activities, often a background or secondary
                     activity. Eno defines ambient music as "new music"
                     whereby "compositional attention" to technological
                     production is key [<a class="ref" href="#eno2004">Eno 2004</a>, 95]. The goal of ambient music
                     is to produce music that offers "an atmosphere, or a surrounding influence: a
                     tint"
                      [<a class="ref" href="#eno2004">Eno 2004</a>, 96]. Since the music is designed to be predictable, attentive listening is
                     not required for best experience. The desired outcome is to have the music
                     become part of the background against which people live their lives.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p39">39</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p39">On the other hand is acousmatic, defined by Pierre Schaeffer, electroacoustic
                     musician-theoretician and pioneer of musique concrète, as "a noise that one hears without seeing what causes
                     it"
                      [<a class="ref" href="#schaeffer2004">Schaeffer 2004</a>, 77]. With acousmatic listening we no longer are concerned with the Cartesian
                     split between objective and subjective reality. Instead, it is the listening
                     itself, as a process, that becomes the phenomenon to be studied. The question
                     "What am I hearing?" asks one to describe the perception itself, not
                     simply the external references. The acousmatic situation generally precludes any
                     relation with what is visible, touchable, measurable [<a class="ref" href="#schaeffer2004">Schaeffer 2004</a>, 78].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p40">40</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p40">The study of acousmatics is important for several reasons, according to
                     Schaeffer. Acousmatics, he says, emphasizes the "subjectivities" involved in listening, focuses attention on the
                     "sonorous object," what we are hearing, rather
                     than the sound source, and strips sound back to a state beyond interpretation
                     [<a class="ref" href="#schaeffer2004">Schaeffer 2004</a>, 78, 79, 81]. When listening to sounds
                     which are hidden from view we take interest in them for themselves. We can gain
                     knowledge of these sounds, we can analyze and describe them, and, we hope, we
                     can transmit this knowledge.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p41">41</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p41">Sound is, thus, relative to our listening experience. This point is considered by
                     Brian Kane, in his scholarly study of Schaeffer's theory of acousmatics, as he
                     argues for acousmatic listening to take a central role in sound and music
                     aesthetics, sound studies, literature, and philosophy from a number of
                     methodological perspectives — historical, cultural, philosophical, and musical
                     [<a class="ref" href="#kane2014">Kane 2014</a>].<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e892">[9]</a>
                     
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">How to proceed?</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p42">42</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p42">Existing DH scholarship, as noted previously, is largely biased toward visuals
                     [<a class="ref" href="#whitney2008">Whitney 2008</a>]. A shift in focus to sound will increase
                     opportunities for scholarship in the arts and humanities focused on sound [<a class="ref" href="#sterne2011">Sterne 2011</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#murray2014">Murray and Wiercinski 2014</a>]. Action research, advocated by Stefano Vannotti,
                     combines design / creative practice with critical academic research and may
                     provide an appropriate methodology for DH work with sound. Action research
                     involves a "systematic enquiry conducted though the medium
                     of practical action, calculated to devise or test new, or newly imported,
                     information, ideas, forms, or procedures and to generate communicable
                     knowledge" and essentially "undertake[s] research through practice"
                      [<a class="ref" href="#vannotti2008">Vannotti 2008</a>, 55]. In other words, to critique and comment on sound, DH researchers should
                     work directly with sound — collecting, recording, archiving, curating, and
                     listening to sounds — the premise of this course.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Conclusion</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p43">43</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p43">In this essay, I have discussed a course entitled <cite class="title italic">Sound and
                        Digital Humanities,"</cite> taught during the 2014 Digital Humanities
                     Summer Institute at the University of Victoria. I have discussed the context for
                     this course, its goals and objectives, and outlined a theoretical framework for
                     utilizing sound(s) in digital humanities (DH) research, teaching, and
                     practice.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p44">44</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p44">My argument is that sound provides scholarly and creative opportunities for those
                     involved with DH. Researchers and scholars may be uncertain how to proceed,
                     however. This course was meant to fill the information gap. To summarize, there
                     are several reasons for a focus on sound . . . 
                     <ul class="list">
                        <li class="item">Sound is ephemeral, disappearing, its meaning quickly lost.</li>
                        <li class="item">Sound is temporal, but capable of returning, here but not here, a
                           feeling, a sense, an experience.
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">Sound was the original and remains a fundamental sensory input and
                           communication channel for human culture.
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">Sound conveys deep, rich information; is capable of providing
                           immersive, interactive contexts for listeners. Through the act of
                           careful listening, listeners can derive a great deal of information
                           about the world they inhabit.
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">Sound transforms space to place.</li>
                        <li class="item">Sound is the phoneme for speech (verbalization of abstract
                           thought).
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">Sound is the central component of narrative (the recounting of a
                           sequence of events and their meaning) and storytelling (the addition of
                           setting, plot, characters, logical unfolding of events, a
                           climax).
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">Sound is the basis for literature (written works considered to possess
                           lasting artistic merit) and the various practices and cultures
                           associated with its production and consumption (reading, writing, and
                           listening).
                        </li>
                     </ul>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p45">45</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p45">In short, sound creates not only new phenomena to observe, research, interpret,
                     and report, but more importantly, new applications for such endeavors in DH.
                     This diversity of approaches to sound was heard by all DHSI 2014 participants
                     during a show-and-tell session at week's end. Participants from each course
                     shared some artifact in the DHSI central auditorium. With room lights
                     extinguished, participants walked onto the stage where, illuminated only by
                     glowing laptop and/or tablet screens, they added their respective aural
                     components to a live performance of "Sounds and Digital
                     Humanities."<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e982">[10]</a></div>
                  
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
               
            </div>
            
            <div id="notes">
               <h2>Notes</h2>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e202"><span class="noteRef">[1]</span> A growing area of interest in the digital
                  humanities is the mobile environment, especially projects that take
                  advantage of the affordances of smart phones and tablets. This course,
                  derived from the Mobile Tech Research Initiative of The Creative Media &amp;
                  Digital Culture Program at Washington State University Vancouver, was aimed
                  at assisting participants to: 1) conceptualize the space and special
                  features of mobile devices; 2) develop the architecture, design, and
                  multimedia content production for a mobile project; and 3) understand the
                  coding and programming requirements for mobile devices. By the end of the
                  course, participants had information they needed for creating projects for
                  the mobile environment and had completed steps toward the development of
                  their own projects. Archival website: <a class="ref" href="http://dtc-wsuv.org/wp/dhsi/2011/06/08/mobile-tech-research-initiative-mtri/" onclick="window.open('http://dtc-wsuv.org/wp/dhsi/2011/06/08/mobile-tech-research-initiative-mtri/'); return false">http://dtc-wsuv.org/wp/dhsi/2011/06/08/mobile-tech-research-initiative-mtri/</a></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e212"><span class="noteRef">[2]</span> Learn more about this course. <a class="ref" href="http://www.radionouspace.net/index.php/sounds-and-digital-humanities/" onclick="window.open('http://www.radionouspace.net/index.php/sounds-and-digital-humanities/'); return false">http://www.radionouspace.net/index.php/sounds-and-digital-humanities/</a></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e256"><span class="noteRef">[3]</span> Jentery Sayers
                  introduces Scalar as designed for authoring and publishing multimodal books
                  through its ability to assemble multiple media files and juxtapose them with
                  one’s writing. A Scalar book assumes digital communications frequently
                  entails blending approaches to composition (images, sound, video, text, and
                  databases, for example). With regard to sound, such affordances enable
                  authors to 
                  <blockquote>
                     <p>
                        represent audio [recorded sound(s)] across the
                        material specificities of multiple media (rather than reducing audio
                        to simply sound or text). It also allows historical evidence to be
                        modeled and exhibited independently of the author’s writing (e.g.,
                        audiences can navigate all audio files collected for the history
                        without reading the author’s interpretations). However, any given
                        audio file in a Scalar book can be annotated through discrete,
                        time-stamped commentary by the author, and this commentary is
                        displayed within the medium’s own temporality. While such features
                        are now typical in visual culture (e.g., annotating lexia in
                        Commentpress or tagging an image in Flickr), few such mechanisms
                        exist for the scholarly treatment of sound.
                         [<a class="ref" href="#sayers2012">Sayers 2012</a>]
                        
                     </p>
                  </blockquote>
               </div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e523"><span class="noteRef">[4]</span> As part of my Radio Nouspace
                  project (<a class="ref" href="http://www.radionouspace.net" onclick="window.open('http://www.radionouspace.net'); return false">www.radionouspace.net</a>), I maintain archival and curatorial
                  information focusing on <cite class="title italic">The War of the
                     Worlds</cite> radio broadcast (<a class="ref" href="http://www.radionouspace.net/index.php/the-war-of-the-worlds" onclick="window.open('http://www.radionouspace.net/index.php/the-war-of-the-worlds'); return false">http://www.radionouspace.net/index.php/the-war-of-the-worlds</a>).
                  I provide links to sound files of the original radio broadcast, the
                  program script, responses, and remediations, as well as to curation by
                  re-creation projects undertaken with students in my digital storytelling
                  class.
               </div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e618"><span class="noteRef">[5]</span> This sound file,
                  along with the one produced by 2015 course participants, can be heard on
                  the "Sounds and Digital Humanities" page of
                  my Radio Nouspace website. Learn more at <a class="ref" href="http://www.radionouspace.net/index.php/sounds-and-digital-humanities" onclick="window.open('http://www.radionouspace.net/index.php/sounds-and-digital-humanities'); return false">http://www.radionouspace.net/index.php/sounds-and-digital-humanities</a></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e635"><span class="noteRef">[6]</span> I outline a
                  theoretical framework for sound as the basis for storytelling and use it to
                  underpin Radio Nouspace and its associated projects, like Re-Imagined Radio
                  and my DHSI Sounds and Digital Humanities course. Discussion, resources, and
                  additional links are available at <a class="ref" href="http://radionouspace.net/index.php/theoretical-framework/" onclick="window.open('http://radionouspace.net/index.php/theoretical-framework/'); return false">http://radionouspace.net/index.php/theoretical-framework/</a></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e658"><span class="noteRef">[7]</span>
                  Marshall McLuhan, with his son and collaborator, Eric, expanded the terms
                  "figure" and "ground," both coined by psychologist and phenomenologist
                  Edgar Rubin in 1915, to explore visual perception. By figure, the
                  McLuhans mean any object rising from or receding into ground. Ground is
                  surface, configurational and comprised of all available figures [<a class="ref" href="#mcluhan1988">McLuhan and McLuhan 1988</a>, 5]. As Thomas MacFarlane explains,
                  ground is subliminal, always beyond perception except through analysis
                  of emerging and receding figures [<a class="ref" href="#macfarlane2013">MacFarlane 2013</a>, 62]. We may connect ground and figure with McLuhan’s idea of acoustic
                  space. Acoustic space is ground, the surface from which emerge figures
                  (sounds) and into which they recede.<br /><br /> MacFarlane provides an
                  interesting example in his book, <cite class="title italic">The Beatles and
                     McLuhan: Understanding the Electric Age</cite>. MacFarlane discusses
                  how The Beatles, four young men from England then and still reigning as the
                  world’s most famous and influential rock music group, used multi-track
                  recording technologies from 1964-1970 to explore McLuhan’s predicted shift
                  from visual modes of perception to a way of knowing based increasingly on
                  sound, a shift to a world where immersion in a global community trumps the
                  fixed individual viewpoint. They stopped touring, concentrating their time
                  and effort instead in the studio where they produced increasingly complex
                  narrative recordings. The Beatles, the group, as a form of ground [<a class="ref" href="#macfarlane2013">MacFarlane 2013</a>, 109], engaged with recorded sound to
                  create a "technological fable (myth)"
                   [<a class="ref" href="#macfarlane2013">MacFarlane 2013</a>, 104] that required active participation from all band members (figures) as
                  well as audience to achieve its creation and consumption. 
               </div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e719"><span class="noteRef">[8]</span> Marshall McLuhan argued that alphabets and writing
                  preserved and extended the aural nature of speech. But, Plato argues in
                  <cite class="title italic">The Phaedrus</cite>, the first critique of
                  writing, written circa 360 B.C.E., that the absence of the rhetor/writer
                  means the text cannot be questioned and is therefore suspect. Plato's work
                  might be considered a landmark in the debate over orality vs. writing. Prior
                  to the age of Plato, speech was the repository of memory. The ear dominated
                  the mind's eye. Writing removed the sound source, placed the source of
                  credibility with seeing. For a long time ancient Greece was bicultural with
                  orality and writing in uneasy coexistence. Orality slowly wound down, until
                  it was replaced by typography and book publication.
               </div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e892"><span class="noteRef">[9]</span>
                  Other worthwhile resources on listening include <cite class="title italic">Acoustic Territories: Sound Culture and Everyday Life</cite>
                  (Brandon LaBelle. Continuum: New York 2010) — explores auditory
                  experience as located inside cultural histories and related
                  ideologies.<br /><br />
                  <cite class="title italic">Hearing Cultures: Essays of Sound, Listening and
                     Modernity</cite> (Veit Erlmann, ed. Continuum: New York 2004) —
                  considers how sound offers a new lens through which to examine culture
                  and complex social issues.<br /><br />
                  <cite class="title italic">Listening</cite> (Jean-Luc Nancy. Fordham University
                  Press: New York 2007) — examines sound in relation to the human body. How is
                  listening different from hearing? What does listening entail? How does what
                  is heard differ from what is seen?
               </div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e982"><span class="noteRef">[10]</span> A recording of this composition and a similar
                  sound composition created by participants of the 2015 class can be heard at
                  <a class="ref" href="http://radionouspace.net/index.php/dhsi-more-information/#history" onclick="window.open('http://radionouspace.net/index.php/dhsi-more-information/#history'); return false">http://radionouspace.net/index.php/dhsi-more-information/#history</a></div>
            </div>
            <div id="worksCited">
               <h2>Works Cited</h2>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="bull2003">
                     <!-- close -->Bull and Beck 2003</span> Bull, M. and L. Beck. "Introduction." In M. Bull and L. Beck (ed.), <cite class="title italic">The Auditory Culture Reader</cite>, Oxford, UK, Berg (2003),
                  pp. 3-4, 12, 16.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="campbell1949">
                     <!-- close -->Campbell 1949</span> Campbell, J. <cite class="title italic">The Hero with a Thousand Faces</cite>. Bollingen Foundation (1949).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="crook1999">
                     <!-- close -->Crook 1999</span> Crook, T. <cite class="title italic">Radio
                     Drama. Theory and Practice,</cite> London, Routledge (1999), p. 8.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="eno2004">
                     <!-- close -->Eno 2004</span> Eno, B. "Ambient
                  Music." In C. Cox and D. Warner (ed.), <cite class="title italic">Audio
                     Culture,</cite> Continuum Press, New York (2004), pp. 94-97.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="feld2003">
                     <!-- close -->Feld 2003</span> Feld, S. "A Rainforest
                  Acoustemology." In M. Bull and L. Beck, (ed.), <cite class="title italic">The Auditory Culture Reader,</cite> Oxford, UK: Berg (2003), pp.
                  223-239.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="ferrington1994">
                     <!-- close -->Ferrington 1994</span> Ferrington, G. "Audio Design: Creating Multi-Sensory Images For The
                  Mind,"
                  <cite class="title italic">Journal of Visual Literary</cite> 14.1 (1994):
                  61-67.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="hall2010">
                     <!-- close -->Hall 2010</span> Hall, A. "Cigarettes
                  and Dance Steps." In J. Biewen and A. Dilworth, (ed.), <cite class="title italic">Reality Radio: Telling True Stories in Sound</cite> (eds),
                  University of North Carolina Press, Chapel Hill (2010), p. 99.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="kane2014">
                     <!-- close -->Kane 2014</span> Kane, B. <cite class="title italic">Sound
                     Unseen: Acousmatic Sound in Theory and Practice</cite>, Oxford University
                  Press, New York (2014).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="levinson1981">
                     <!-- close -->Levinson 1981</span> Levinson, P. "Media Evolution and the Primacy of Speech." ERIC #ED 235510
                  (1981).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="levinson1999">
                     <!-- close -->Levinson 1999</span> Levinson, P. <cite class="title italic">Digital McLuhan: A Guide to the Information Millennium</cite>. Routledge,
                  New York (1999).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="lópez2004">
                     <!-- close -->López 2004</span> López, F. "Profound
                  Listening and Environmental Sound Matter." In C. Cox and D. Warner,
                  (ed.), <cite class="title italic">Audio Culture: Readings in Modern Music</cite>.
                  Continuum, New York (2004) pp. 82-83.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="macfarlane2013">
                     <!-- close -->MacFarlane 2013</span> MacFarlane, T. <cite class="title italic">The Beatles and McLuhan: Understanding the Electric
                     Age</cite>. The Scarecrow Press: Lanham, NJ (2013).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="mcluhan1964">
                     <!-- close -->McLuhan 1964</span> McLuhan, M. <cite class="title italic">Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man</cite> New York, McGraw Hill
                  (1964).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="mcluhan1977">
                     <!-- close -->McLuhan 1977</span> McLuhan, M. "The
                  Laws of Media."
                  <cite class="title italic">et cetera</cite> 1977 34(2): 173-179.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="mcluhan1988">
                     <!-- close -->McLuhan and McLuhan 1988</span> McLuhan, M. and McLuhan,
                  E. <cite class="title italic">Laws of Media: The New Science</cite>. University of
                  Toronto Press: Toronto (1988).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="mcpherson2009">
                     <!-- close -->McPherson 2009</span> McPherson, T. "Media Studies and the Digital Humanities."
                  <cite class="title italic">Cinema Journal</cite> 48.2 (2009): 119-123.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="murch2005">
                     <!-- close -->Murch 2005</span> Murch, W. "Womb
                  Tone,"
                  <cite class="title italic">Transom Review</cite> 5.1 (2005). <a class="ref" href="http:/transom.org/2005/walter-murch-part-1/" onclick="window.open('http:/transom.org/2005/walter-murch-part-1/'); return false">http:/transom.org/2005/walter-murch-part-1/</a> (accessed 15 September
                  2014).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="murray2014">
                     <!-- close -->Murray and Wiercinski 2014</span> Murray, A. and
                  Wiercinski, J. "A Design Methodology for Sound-based Web
                  Archives."
                  <span class="hi italic">Digital Humanities Quarterly</span> 8.2 (2014). <a class="ref" href="http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/8/2/000173/000173.html" onclick="window.open('http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/8/2/000173/000173.html'); return false">http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/8/2/000173/000173.html</a>
                  (accessed 15 September 2014)
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="odonnell1988">
                     <!-- close -->O'Donnell 1988</span> O'Donnell, J. <cite class="title italic">Avatars of the Word: From Papyrus to Cyberspace</cite>.
                  Harvard University Press, Cambridge (1988).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="sayers2012">
                     <!-- close -->Sayers 2012</span> Sayers, J. "Writing with Sound: Composing Multimodal, Long-Form Scholarship."
                  Digital Humanities 2012 Conference (2012). <a class="ref" href="http://www.dh2012.uni-hamburg.de/conference/programme/abstracts/writing-with-sound-composing-multimodal-long-form-scholarship/" onclick="window.open('http://www.dh2012.uni-hamburg.de/conference/programme/abstracts/writing-with-sound-composing-multimodal-long-form-scholarship/'); return false">http://www.dh2012.uni-hamburg.de/conference/programme/abstracts/writing-with-sound-composing-multimodal-long-form-scholarship/</a></div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="schaeffer2004">
                     <!-- close -->Schaeffer 2004</span> Schaeffer, P. "Acousmatics." In C. Cox and D. Warner, (ed.), <cite class="title italic">Audio Culture: Readings in Modern Music</cite>. Continuum
                  Press, New York (2004), pp. 76-81.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="schafer">
                     <!-- close -->Schafer</span> [See also Schafer, R. M. <cite class="title italic">The Soundscape: Our Sonic Environment and The Tuning of the World</cite>.
                  Destiny Books, Rochester, Vermont (1993) adapted from <cite class="title italic">The
                     New Soundscape</cite> (1966) and <cite class="title italic">The Tuning of the
                     World</cite> (1977)]
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="schafer1977">
                     <!-- close -->Schafer 1977</span> Schafer, R. M. <cite class="title italic">The Tuning of the World: A Pioneering Exploration Into the Past History and
                     Present State of the Most Neglected Aspect Of Our Environment: The
                     Soundscape</cite>. McClelland and Stewart, Toronto (1977).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="smith2003">
                     <!-- close -->Smith 2003</span> Smith, B. "Tuning
                  into London c. 1600." In M. Bull and L. Beck (ed.), <cite class="title italic">The Auditory Culture Reader.</cite> Oxford, UK, Berg (2003),
                  pp. 127-135.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="sterne2011">
                     <!-- close -->Sterne 2011</span> Sterne, J."Audio
                  in Digital Humanities Authorship: A Roadmap (version 0.5)", <cite class="title italic">Super Bon!</cite> (July 24, 2011) <a class="ref" href="http://superbon.net/?p=1915" onclick="window.open('http://superbon.net/?p=1915'); return false">http://superbon.net/?p=1915</a>
                  (accessed 15 September 2014).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="vannotti2008">
                     <!-- close -->Vannotti 2008</span> Vannotti, Stefano M. "Let Us Do What We Can Do Best: But How Can We Produce
                  Knowledge by Designing Interfaces?" In C. Sommerer, L. Mignonneau,
                  and D. King (ed.), <cite class="title italic">Interface Cultures: Artistic Aspects of
                     Interaction</cite>. New Brunswick, NJ, Transaction Publishers (2008), pp.
                  51-60.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="whitney2008">
                     <!-- close -->Whitney 2008</span> Whitney, A. "Cultivating Sonic Literacy in the Humanities Classroom,"
                  <cite class="title italic">Music, Sound, and the Moving Image</cite> 2.2 (2008):
                  145-148.
               </div>
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar"><a href="#">Preview</a>  |  <span style="color: grey">XML</span> |  <a href="#" onclick="javascript:window.print();" title="Click for print friendly version">Print Article</a></div>
         </div>
      </div>
   </body>
</html>