<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
      <title>[PREVIEW] DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly: </title>
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_screen.css" media="screen" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_print.css" media="print" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" /><style type="text/css">
        #mainContent {
          float: none;
          padding-top: 2em;
          padding-left: 4em;
          padding-right: 4em;
          margin-left: 225px;
           
        }</style></head>
   <body>
      <div id="mainContent">
         <div xmlns:dhqBiblio="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/ns/biblio" class="DHQarticle">
            <div id="pubInfo">Preview<br />Volume 010 Number 
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar">
               <form id="taporware" action="get">
                  <div><a href="//preview/index.html">Preview</a>
                      | 
                     <a rel="external" href="//vol/10//000248.xml">XML</a>
                     
                     | 
                     		   Discuss
                     			(<a href="/dhq/vol/10//000248/000248.html#disqus_thread" data-disqus-identifier="000248">
                        				Comments
                        			</a>)
                     
                  </div>
               </form>
            </div>
            
            <div class="DHQheader">
               
               
               
               
               <h1 class="articleTitle">The Why and How of Middleware</h1>
               
               <div class="author"><span style="color: grey">Johanna
                     Drucker</span> &lt;<a href="mailto:drucker_at_gseis_dot_ucla_dot_edu" onclick="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('drucker_at_gseis_dot_ucla_dot_edu'); return false;" onkeypress="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('drucker_at_gseis_dot_ucla_dot_edu'); return false;">drucker_at_gseis_dot_ucla_dot_edu</a>&gt;, UC Los Angeles
               </div>
               
               <div class="author"><span style="color: grey">Patrik BO Svensson
                     </span> &lt;<a href="mailto:patrik_dot_svensson_at_umu_dot_se" onclick="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('patrik_dot_svensson_at_umu_dot_se'); return false;" onkeypress="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('patrik_dot_svensson_at_umu_dot_se'); return false;">patrik_dot_svensson_at_umu_dot_se</a>&gt;, Umeå University
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               <span class="Z3988" title="url_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;rft_val_fmt=info%3Aofi%2Ffmt%3Akev%3Amtx%3Ajournal&amp;rfr_id=info%3Asid%2Fzotero.org%3A2&amp;rft.genre=article&amp;rft.atitle=The%20Why%20and%20How%20of%20Middleware&amp;rft.jtitle=Digital%20Humanities%20Quarterly&amp;rft.stitle=DHQ&amp;rft.issn=1938-4122&amp;rft.date=&amp;rft.volume=010&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.aulast=Drucker&amp;rft.aufirst=Johanna&amp;rft.au=Johanna%20Drucker&amp;rft.au=Patrik BO%20Svensson"> </span></div>
            
            
            <div id="DHQtext">
               
               
               <div id="abstract">
                  <h2>Abstract</h2>
                  
                  <p>The presentation, publication and research platforms used for
                     scholarly work in the Digital Humanities embody argument
                     structures that are not always explicitly acknowledged. This
                     article examines these platforms, and their protocols, as
                     "middleware" that includes such purpose-designed
                     projects as Omeka, and Scalar, and general purpose ones such
                     as Drupal and PowerPoint, to ask how they embody rhetorical
                     assumptions at every level of production (from back-end
                     assumptions about what constitutes the smallest unit of
                     discourse, to the front-end modes of presentation and
                     organization of display). It extends the concept of
                     middleware to include physical and social presentation
                     spaces, activities (such as witnessing), to ask how these,
                     also, perform the rhetorical activity of enunciation,
                     positionality, and other discursive modalities.
                  </p>
                  
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">The Problem</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p1">1</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p1"> The way research questions, data, and material
                     manifestations come together in project presentations poses
                     key questions for the digital humanities. We propose that
                     thinking about "middleware" as a concept and as
                     concrete platforms can help us pay more attention to the
                     ways tools structure our arguments or express thinking in
                     protocols programmed into these platforms. Our concept of
                     platform is broad and includes physical spaces of display
                     and circumstances of presentation, as well as tools for
                     creating such presentations. By paying attention to
                     middleware we hope to show how it functions as a tool for
                     humanities scholars, technology experts, information
                     specialists and designers as they think through and
                     articulate intellectual arguments <em class="emph">materially</em> in
                     a digital age. Part of our premise is that though platform
                     structures are often used for their ease or familiarity,
                     they imprint their format features on our thinking and
                     predispose us to organize our thoughts and arguments in
                     conformance with their structuring principles — often from
                     the very beginning of a project’s conception. The same can
                     be said of print forms and formats, and the notion of
                     middleware is not meant to suggest that we are concerned
                     only with digital platforms. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p2">2</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p2">Understanding connections among the conceptual layer of these
                     platforms as tools for use is a major challenge that
                     requires integrated critical-material sensitivity and strong
                     conceptual-experimental work. We are not interested in
                     trivializing the complexity of this challenge, but rather
                     suggest that the way we approach this question in all its
                     complexity is likely to be an important factor for
                     understanding the conditioning performed by digital
                     platforms and for practical engagement with imagining and
                     making new or customized platforms. A key question for the
                     digital humanities and the humanities at large is how we can
                     create middleware designed for our purposes — or perhaps,
                     <em class="emph">from</em> our purposes.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p3">3</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p3">Wherein lies the difficulty? We suggest that there are
                     several obstacles that make the creation of critically
                     aware, intellectually meaningful, and materially expressive
                     and deliberately structured arguments challenging. Here they
                     are. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head"> 1. Inattention to Material support of Knowledge
                        Production 
                     </h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p4">4</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p4">First, the humanities have a tendency not to be
                        critically attuned to the material features of their own
                        contemporary knowledge production. In spite of recent,
                        useful, work in Software and Platform studies, and
                        related fields on the structural workings and
                        assumptions of these elements [<a class="ref" href="#sterne2012">Sterne 2012</a>]; [<a class="ref" href="#wardrip-fruin2009">Wardrip-Fruin 2009</a>]; [<a class="ref" href="#tufte2003">Tufte 2003</a>], there is very little critical
                        work on presentation software (such as PowerPoint, for
                        instance, which is ubiquitous), or blogs, or the web as
                        a default platform for digital work in the digital
                        humanities, or software like Omeka as a conditioning
                        device shaping online exhibits (or archives and other
                        presentations). Who has looked seriously at the
                        rhetorical structure that common platforms such as
                        Scalar, Drupal, or WordPress impose on arguments? Scalar
                        and Omeka have developed from within the digital
                        humanities communities, and their features offer a good
                        study of how their designs position them in relation to
                        more domain-agnostic platforms like WordPress or
                        PowerPoint, whose market saturation is a testimony to
                        their supposedly generic character.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p5">5</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p5"> This often uncritical uptake continues a long tradition
                        of ignoring the ways embodiment and argument work in
                        analogue formats, of course, where texts are generally
                        considered without regard to their instantiation in
                        fonts, layouts, or other features of material
                        production. The complex intertextuality of a codex book
                        or the narrative implications of a display in
                        architectural space are not always given their due as an
                        integral part of the production of a work or the
                        experience of it. Designers and architects are trained
                        to think about the ways formal organization of graphical
                        or physical space factors into the production of
                        experience and/or meaning — not in a determinative way,
                        but as an integral aspect of a system of conventions and
                        codes. We come to take for granted the relegation of
                        certain features of argument to footnotes, as surely as
                        we accept the role of the pantry in storing an inventory
                        of goods, though the status of the stored or subordinate
                        entities may be as much an effect as an inherent quality
                        in each case.
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">2. Attachment to a Service Model of
                        Implementation
                     </h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p6">6</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p6">Second, the digital humanities often seem
                        over-constrained by a service model of implementation.
                        In spite of much talk of the collaboration between
                        intellectual and technical dimensions of projects,
                        little discussion of the argument structure of design
                        has emerged to show how methodological and technical
                        work embodies critical issues. We have hardly any
                        examples of projects whose <em class="emph">execution</em> can be
                        abstracted into an argument.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e274">[1]</a> In other
                        words, we have precious few cases of <em class="emph">how</em> a
                        work argues through its structuring protocols, instead
                        focusing on <em class="emph">what</em> the argument or database
                        structures might be. A critical edition is not a
                        multitext, for instance, and the demonstration of the
                        difference between them would necessarily engage with
                        the argument structure of the platforms that support
                        them.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p7">7</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p7"> With few exceptions, digital humanists have not taken up
                        the critical tools of literary and historical studies
                        and made them part of the implementation of projects by
                        insisting on interpretative rather than declarative
                        modes of presentation (for exceptions, see Mandell 2012;
                        Klein 2014; Chang, Dooley, and Tuovinen 2002; Emerson
                        2014; Portela 2013) . Humanists continue to be seduced
                        by tools to whose workings they give limited attention,
                        so they execute their projects (e.g. in network analysis
                        software) without knowing how the results were
                        generated. In traditional humanities, this would be like
                        having a machine perform a literary interpretation that
                        one then explained, but could not account for in terms
                        of its formation.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e286">[2]</a> Instead, digital humanists need to push
                        critical issues into the implementation.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p8">8</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p8"> The difference between Scalar, with its intent to
                        support customization of argument structures, and
                        WordPress, which has a hierarchical page, theme, and
                        sub-theme structure, provides a useful contrast. Both
                        have relational databases in their back-end
                        infrastructure (which in itself is a conditioning
                        factor, cf. [<a class="ref" href="#dourish2014">Dourish 2014</a>]), but Scalar is
                        meant to allow multiple points of entry in a
                        presentation, and to support widely varied pathways that
                        are not strictly hierarchical. Whether these
                        distinctions are sufficient to create a critical
                        difference can be debated, but at least they are evident
                        to a front-end user/reader and to an author starting the
                        composition process. Data structures remain a rather
                        unfamiliar area of compositional competence for most
                        humanists, however, and this is crucial since the
                        middleware platforms are all structuring and structured
                        environments. This quickly brings us to the next
                        obstacle.
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">3. Need of Competencies</h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p9">9</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p9"> Humanistic scholars who engage with digital projects
                        sometimes seem to leave their critical sensibility
                        behind with regard to the rhetoric of the digital
                        manifestations they imagine and create. Paradoxically,
                        such projects can demonstrate more positivism than the
                        positivism we often (and sometimes erroneously)
                        associate with science and technology. References to a
                        digital artifact displayed on screen are often stated in
                        a construction that begins, "This
                        is..." (rather than "This
                        is constructed as...and by... to show...") as
                        if the digitization, display, and other features of
                        production did not factor into what is present on the
                        screen. Also, scholars trained traditionally in
                        humanistic disciplines often do not to have the
                        methodological competence and computational rigor for
                        working with data and materials. The digital humanities
                        has a weak track record of incorporating the critical
                        insights developed in critical theory into database
                        structures and ontologies into the design of projects
                        (see e.g. [<a class="ref" href="#smith2007">Smith 2007</a>]).
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p10">10</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p10"> These critical engagements are harder than they look —
                        what constitutes a data structure that incorporates
                        cultural diversity, exposes inequities of gender, or
                        shows biases of nationalist perspectives? The question
                        is not simply answered by addressing the way a data
                        structure is populated, what is put into its fields or
                        tags, for instance, but how the organization of the
                        fields and tag sets already prescribes what can be
                        included and how these inclusions are put into
                        signifying relations with each other. (An easy case for
                        understanding this is thinking about how gender might be
                        a structured data category. Is a database set up in a
                        binary, two-column, male-female pair of fields? Or is
                        there a single field in which any number of values —
                        some controlled vocabulary and others free text — could
                        be entered? Or are there multiple fields across a
                        spectrum of possibilities with "pick one" or
                        "pick all that apply" options. Or can we
                        imagine another type of data organization altogether to
                        accommodate for a continuum or intersectional model of
                        gender?) An argument is made in the ways the database
                        itself is structured, in advance of the values it
                        contains. Cultural values, terms of belief, political
                        attitudes, sentiments, emotional attitudes, and nearly
                        every aspect of human experience have culturally
                        specific, historically determined, and individually
                        inflected expressions of these areas. These are
                        expressed in texts, images, performances, and rituals of
                        all kinds. As we re-represent these in data structures,
                        we have to ask how these structures can be expanded to
                        have some of the sophistication of poetic or aesthetic
                        ones. The critical tools to answer these questions
                        exist, but they come more often from information studies
                        and archival studies than digital humanities. And when
                        they do, they are couched in cultural studies terms of
                        critique rather than as features that support informed
                        practice and alternative design.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p11">11</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p11"> Some of this is a labor/training issue — learning enough
                        computational skill to "sketch" arguments and ideas
                        in digital form is a non-trivial matter. Some is a
                        cultural issue — the critical reflections on data
                        structures and ideologies that are developed in
                        information studies rarely find their way into the
                        humanities (where the information professionals are too
                        often mischaracterized as mere technologists). 
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">4. Absence of Design Knowledge</h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p12">12</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p12">A lack of developed material aesthetics and incorporation
                        of design processes (such as prototyping) into the
                        digital humanities and the humanities means that the
                        material manifestations are often not fully developed.
                        Platforms are often adopted by default. The focus on
                        digitalized cultural heritage in the digital humanities
                        has lead to substantial effort being spent on creating
                        datasets as content (digitizing the papers of someone)
                        rather than understanding the necessity for designing
                        interpretative frameworks (how should the digitization
                        structure present the papers of a political figure
                        versus a poet?). This is true in physical spaces, human
                        circumstances (the witnessing example discussed below),
                        and platforms (printed formats, software, and so
                        on).
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p13">13</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p13"> Insufficient resources are expended on designing such
                        frameworks, though these workflows could make for much
                        more powerful outcomes and notions of how to
                        operationalize humanities concepts in digital
                        scholarship. The expertise of a documentary editor, for
                        example, familiar with the many systems of relations
                        (textual, social, political, etc.) in which the
                        documents are active agents, might not have a way to
                        push the hierarchal organization of Omeka, with its
                        files, folders, and collections to reflect the
                        multi-layered cross-currents in the documents. Such an
                        editor might decide, as an alternative, to use Drupal
                        for its taxonomies and elaborate metadata capacity, only
                        to be confronted with the lack of structure in the way
                        that platform organizes its underlying repository. If
                        Omeka provides a view of the collections of documents
                        and Drupal puts them into a single holding pool, then is
                        that materially significant or simply a matter of a
                        compromise and modification?
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p14">14</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p14"> The argument structures implicit in these platform
                        design decisions force the user to work within built-in
                        constraints that have implications for the way the front
                        end display will expose the documents. Simple issues
                        such as layering documents, or being able to pull
                        multiple versions of a document into view in a single
                        screen, are almost impossible to do on the fly unless
                        the middleware has built these drag and drop or layered
                        features into the design. To enact a comparison across
                        multiple digitized images, the user might create a
                        work-around by opening multiple windows — making an
                        argument through the desktop as a middleware platform,
                        with the limitations built into that environment
                        (including the lack of "memory" of arguments made
                        over time through the placement of desktop windows). Our
                        screen interface is a powerfully ubiquitous middleware —
                        but how often do we reflect on the rhetorical difference
                        between a swipe and a click? If the effect is to change
                        the screen display in each instance, does it matter that
                        one seems to push content from view in an infinite
                        flip-chart and the other seems to reveal specific
                        content on request?
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p15">15</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p15">While this description of difficulties certainly
                        stereotypes and simplifies complex interrelations, and
                        does not list numerous exceptions and much excellent
                        work carried out on different levels, it addresses
                        weaknesses both in the digital humanities and the
                        humanities at large. The obstacles — attention to
                        material platforms, need to think beyond a service model
                        of implementation, lack of technical competencies, and
                        absence of design knowledge–are all relevant to the
                        discussion of middleware from a development perspective
                        and from a critical analytic one. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p16">16</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p16"> A few notes on terminology and definitions: We see the
                        digital humanities as a broadly conceived area and
                        contact zone closely aligned with the humanities
                        disciplines and other relevant actors. It is an
                        inclusive field with intellectual, aesthetic and
                        technological engagement and drive. Much work in the
                        digital humanities is organized around projects, and
                        when we use "project" we do this with the
                        realization that projects are not the only
                        organizational form for work in the digital humanities.
                        Also, the idea of projects in the digital humanities is
                        linked to certain epistemic commitments going back to
                        the early days of humanities computing.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p17">17</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p17"> What we are suggesting is a way of thinking critically
                        about the design at work in the digital humanities,
                        whether done in projects or not. We use the term
                        "platform" to describe infrastructural,
                        scholarly and cultural systems. However, we recognize
                        that the platform metaphor can be problematic in
                        foregrounding technological resources and obscuring what
                        is underneath [<a class="ref" href="#mattern2014">Mattern 2014</a>] and in
                        suggesting flatness and stability [<a class="ref" href="#goldberg2015">Goldberg 2015</a>] or a kind of stage on which
                        work is performed — rather than the scaffolding that
                        structures the work. Furthermore, platforms are
                        discursive as much as material artefacts, and their
                        social, cultural and economic embedding often calls for
                        "sales speak" from the makers (whether
                        commercial, academic or both) and a unitary,
                        positivistic view of the platform shared by makers and
                        users.
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Introducing Middleware</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p18">18</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p18">Platforms that support digital humanities activity abound. As
                     noted above, many are purpose-made from within the community
                     — such as Omeka, DocTracker, Scalar, Zotero and others
                     adopted effectively to create or manage content — such as
                     WordPress, Drupal, Islandora, Collective Access, or the
                     ordinary stuff of slideware and publishing platforms such as
                     PowerPoint, Prezi, etc. These are convenient and effective
                     vehicles for structuring offline and web-based presentations
                     of cultural materials (documents, images, maps, sound and
                     moving image files) within the framework of intellectual
                     arguments. But each raises questions about how the platforms
                     themselves frame arguments, define and delimit what can be
                     said through the structuring principles of its design. These
                     questions guide our examination of what we are terming
                     "middleware," the platforms that sit between the
                     front end of user experience and the back-end of information
                     architecture, data models and "concepts." How do they
                     work in structuring what can and cannot be expressed,
                     presented, or argued in the enunciative system (more on the
                     relevance of this concept in a moment) of our projects? 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p19">19</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p19"> Middleware might, on first reflection, seem to be everything
                     in general and nothing in particular — just as the codex
                     book is a highly specific structure that accommodates itself
                     to multiple disciplines and discursive forms (anthologies,
                     novels, manuals, textbooks, reference guides, and so on).
                     But the ways formal structures impose their imprint on
                     thought and argument, and the ways enunciative operations
                     work, are not limited to the domain of digital humanities.
                     Friedrich Nietzsche, railing against the format of the
                     school essay as a form whose imprint had ruined intellectual
                     life, was making an argument against the way the constraints
                     of middleware function [<a class="ref" href="#nietzsche1872">Nietzsche 1872</a>]. The
                     school essay had conditioned thinking, made it formulaic by
                     its structure and organization. Architect Lars Lerup, in his
                     work in the 1980s on the "no-family house" was making a
                     similar argument about domestic architecture and the
                     imposition of the program of the nuclear family into
                     organizing principles for space to accommodate its
                     activities [<a class="ref" href="#lerup1987">Lerup 1987</a>]. Middleware might have
                     agency, the way "witnessing" calls forth certain
                     aspects of experience into an apparently objective record
                     (as discussed by [<a class="ref" href="#rentschler2004">Rentschler 2004</a>] and others
                     in archival studies, like [<a class="ref" href="#trace2002">Trace 2002</a>], who
                     argue that witnessing is constitutive, not passive). It
                     might be as literal as the ways an academic or institutional
                     space structures some possibilities and excludes others (as
                     per Shannon Mattern’s observations on library architectures,
                     see [<a class="ref" href="#mattern2007">Mattern 2007</a>]). But our discussion of
                     middleware will focus on platforms, data structures,
                     formats, and ontologies that have quickly conventionalized
                     and thus naturalized our ways of thinking about creative and
                     intellectual production in the digital humanities.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p20">20</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p20"> A conceptual dimension of production, like the architectural
                     program referenced above, is different from a platform or a
                     physical space. While we are not trying to collapse these
                     into a single category of coercive technology or
                     instrumental form, we do want to stress the analogies and
                     connections. Our work is mediated by environments and
                     assumptions that are not determinative, but may be defining
                     in more subtle ways. In each case, format elements become
                     formatting features of a system, actively contributing to
                     the way that system works, and in its working, allows for
                     some assumptions to go unnoticed, some possibilities to be
                     supported, and some aspects of argument to be achieved only
                     with extreme difficulty or compensatory adjustment. Our
                     purpose is to expose these workings, and to make their
                     assumptions a part of the conversation about scholarly
                     argument in the digital environment.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p21">21</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p21"> Platforms, spaces and tools are designed, inhabited and used
                     by people. They are inscribed socially, culturally, and as
                     the result of negotiation over time. The notion of
                     middleware should be taken to encompass the temporal
                     entangledness of different layers, perspectives and use
                     patterns that make up intellectual and material programs.
                     Intellectual middleware does not describe a static
                     situation, but rather a changing set of protocols,
                     conventions and assumptions. Furthermore, there is an
                     ecology of systems and platforms at any given time, and
                     while there may not be a de facto choice in many situations
                     (e.g. the institution may require the use of specific
                     platforms), at other times there can be agency in choosing
                     and adapting platforms. As we show below, such choices can
                     be informed by carefully considering the intellectual
                     middleware of such platforms and systems.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Middleware and the Digital Humanities</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p22">22</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p22">To date, we could argue that the digital humanities suffers
                     from an overall lack of scholarly impact. Very few examples
                     can be cited of achievements that have had a substantial
                     influence within a discipline or been intellectually
                     comparable to other significant work in humanities fields.
                     Projects may <em class="emph">support</em> research, but they have
                     had little to contribute <em class="emph">as</em> research to their
                     home disciplines or the humanities more broadly.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e430">[3]</a> This is not the
                     fault of the design of the projects, but perhaps,
                     underscores the limits of claims for what "the digital"
                     contributes to the humanities <em class="emph">that is specifically
                        humanistic.</em> Data mining, text analysis, and
                     visualization tools used for or with humanistic corpora
                     produce results that do not deviate in the least from those
                     produced on social science materials, for instance (by
                     contrast, the reading of a poetic work would be considered
                     anomalous if its techniques were applied to a passage in an
                     accounting text).<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e440">[4]</a> Coming from the other
                     direction, software designers responsible for some of the
                     tools for analysis and display are calling for humanist
                     scholars using these to give intellectual credit for the
                     structure of those displays as expressions of the
                     intellectual design of the software. A Gephi diagram is not
                     a natural expression of structured data, it is instead a
                     distinct expression in a system authored by a programmer
                     responsible for the coming-into-being of that visual form in
                     a precise form. This is a crucial point as well, since it
                     makes clear that what passes for a mere tool is anything but
                     — it is a structuring argument built on top of and
                     expressing data whose own lifecycle of production is usually
                     obscured. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p23">23</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p23">At stake in thinking about middleware directly is the need to
                     pay precise attention to the way tools structure our
                     arguments or express thinking in protocols programmed into
                     the platform. Common platforms — Omeka, Scalar, PowerPoint,
                     WordPress etc. — do not simply "display" content any
                     more than a network (e.g. Gephi) diagram does. Highly
                     specific material conditions organize production at every
                     level. The very nature of what constitutes a file, the
                     smallest unit of semantic value, the syntax of connections
                     and relations, means of manipulation or use of intellectual
                     content is determined by the platform’s capacities.
                     Middleware is a set of mediating and remediating protocols.
                     It introduces semantic inflection through organization (are
                     files in trees, folders, flat structures, collections or
                     linked through taxonomies?). If middleware tends to
                     disappear, it is not because it is transparent, but because
                     it sits in an in-between space, between content and
                     consumption as a black box of procedures and organizational
                     operations invisible to view. When we go to the theater, we
                     know there is a text, a play, activity backstage and we see
                     the play unfold between the opening and closing of the
                     curtains. Unless it is a self-conscious modern work of
                     experimental or existential theater, we are not constantly
                     called to attend to the material features of production
                     through every instance of the performance. The middleware of
                     stage, stagecraft, lighting systems, scale and size of the
                     theater, sightlines, and other elements that structure the
                     experience throughout disappear from attention. When we take
                     a moment to consider the specific features of that construct
                     — wings, props, lights, up and down stage areas of action —
                     the mediating conventions pop into view. These elements are
                     what make the production different in character and
                     experience from a work seen on a puppet stage or in a sports
                     arena. The very orientation of the proscenium stage to its
                     audience is a fundamental act with rhetorical force. The
                     incommensurable quality of these three experiences — puppet
                     play, theater performance, arena event — demonstrates the
                     structuring effect of middleware. The same analysis can be
                     applied to analog materials, to the conventions and
                     protocols of print, the features that make a book with a
                     scholarly apparatus rhetorically distinct from a collection
                     of poems or a novel, a newspaper, a phone directory, and
                     other printed matter. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p24">24</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p24">Our focus on digital humanities requires some narrowing for
                     the sake of argument. Middleware was invoked, above, as a
                     term that includes "witnessing,"
                     "databases,"
                     "content management systems or platforms," and
                     "physical infrastructure." What does that mean in
                     the context of digital humanities? Witnessing is not
                     equivalent to or interchangeable with the testimony being
                     heard, recorded, absorbed, listened to, or transcribed.
                     Witnessing is a mode of attention, a structuring mode. Even
                     before it confers value, weight, or significance, it makes
                     testimony into substance. Witnessing is, fundamentally, an
                     act of structuring a discourse, bringing it into being in a
                     framework of emphases and selections. It is not the content
                     of the testimony, but part of its condition of becoming a
                     structured and received communication. A database is not
                     just data, it is not merely the stuff of quantitative or
                     qualitative material structured into computationally
                     tractable entities. It is the structuring apparatus that
                     makes these entities signify relationally, giving them some
                     possibilities and not others. A database is a mode of
                     discourse, or, to paraphrase Michel Foucault, a discursive
                     modality, governed by rules of inclusion and exclusion. A
                     content management system or platform is middleware that is
                     also a discursive modality. These systems contain a host of
                     protocols scripted into their operations that disappear from
                     view in the reception of their final display. They are also
                     structuring frames that create a semantic inflection through
                     their organizing operations. Physical spaces, particularly
                     institutional spaces, embody programs that organize
                     experience — not deterministically, but opportunistically. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p25">25</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p25">The traditional classroom is associated with a model of
                     pedagogy (concept) which is codified through a structured
                     set of assumptions about learning, including the role of
                     teacher (in control) distinguished from students (largely
                     being on the receiving end), the idea of a relatively fixed
                     set of "things" to learn, and learning taking place in
                     a decontextualized and closed situation (cf. Scott-Webber
                     2004 on agrarian and industrial school floorplans). This
                     constitutes a kind of intellectual middleware, although
                     somewhat caricatured here. These assumptions are materially
                     manifested in the traditional classroom through the position
                     of students (in rows directed towards the teacher) and the
                     teacher (up front, historically often in a physically
                     elevated position), control of media surfaces (one
                     whiteboard or projector screen close to the teacher and
                     controlled by the teacher) and the closed door (a closed-off
                     learning space separate from the world outside). These
                     material manifestations can be regarded as interface, and
                     while specific learning situations can certainly up-end the
                     traditional use of such spaces, the pervasiveness of
                     conventional use, material affordances and institutional
                     expectations is considerable. Importantly, this
                     pervasiveness is not just a matter of the material
                     conditions, but also a matter of deeply embedded ideas about
                     learning associated with that type of space and situation.
                     The strong association of material conditions and ideas is
                     what makes intellectual middleware relevant. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p26">26</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p26">Other institutional spaces offer other possibilities. The
                     HUMlab space at Umeå, with its multiple screens angled to
                     create a set of point of view systems, connections through
                     position proximity, scale, and other features of the
                     physical space is radically different from a conventional
                     classroom or the seminar room, where a circle of chairs and
                     desks looks at a single screen focusing attention of the
                     group to the front of the room. The very coming and going of
                     individuals is structured differently, the cost of attention
                     and inattention, the modes and possibilities of engagement
                     and exchange are all aspects of the space. In terms of space
                     and infrastructure, the distinctions among conceptual
                     infrastructure, design principles and actualized
                     infrastructure made elsewhere [<a class="ref" href="#svensson2011">Svensson 2011</a>],
                     map well onto the idea of intellectual middleware discussed
                     in this chapter. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p27">27</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p27"> The argument for middleware is not an argument for
                     deterministic readings of platforms, or of software, or of
                     the disciplinary regimes (to use quaint post-structural
                     language) of technologies or architectures (informational or
                     physical). But it is an argument for attending to the
                     rhetorical force and structuring effect of these aspects of
                     our work, thought, and experience. It raises questions about
                     how we think and how <em class="emph">else</em> we might, and what
                     the tools for thought are within the humanities as we
                     continue to structure platforms and environments for their
                     digital enactment. 
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">How Middleware Thinks</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p28">28</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p28">Most digital humanities projects — museum exhibits, online
                     archives, articles, mapping projects, even platforms for
                     search, query, and analysis — consist of a back-end of
                     structured files and a front-end designed as an interface.
                     In between is a suite of processes and protocols that make
                     the digital assets into a user experience. Interface,
                     however dynamic and interactive, is a display or support for
                     behavior, but the scripts and instructions that are
                     triggered by the interface depend upon the ways the
                     middleware works. Our attention will be to the authoring
                     side of this experience rather than to the user side, with
                     the idea of showing how middleware constructs arguments. We
                     will consider the contrast between presentation modes and
                     content management approaches in common middleware.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p29">29</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p29"> If we argue that a piece of software such as PowerPoint or
                     Keynote (presentation software) is a platform that
                     conditions, even determines, how we "make
                     presentations" and what counts as presentations, then
                     what does that mean [<a class="ref" href="#robles-anderson2016">Robles-Anderson and Svensson 2016</a>]?
                     Presentation software has very little processing or digital
                     asset management capability. Its functions are fairly
                     limited. If I am using PowerPoint, I am constrained by the
                     frame-by-frame sequence of the "slides" that are its
                     basic unit. I can embed images, sound, even video, into the
                     slides, but the frame remains. I can make blends, blurs, or
                     transitions among slides, but the slides are still intact. I
                     can reshuffle the slides — their order is flexible. No
                     larger data structure determines the identity of a slide so
                     that it has to be the first, fourth, or follow after or be
                     placed before another. The basic modular unit of argument is
                     the slide. Within the slide I can do various things with the
                     text and embedded files, and I can establish a theme that
                     brands the presentation throughout. Intertextual play of the
                     kind set up in the book format is rare; even if it is
                     possible to introduce a theme and variation within a
                     PowerPoint sequence, its slides are rarely orchestrated in
                     that way. The presentation emphasizes the slide-by-slide
                     singular framed content unit rather than the presentation as
                     a whole. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p30">30</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p30"> PowerPoints may follow print conventions to the extent that
                     they have a title, sections, sub-sections, and often end
                     with references, but they don’t have the navigation system
                     that a book has. One doesn’t turn to page 25 of a PPT, or
                     use an index or table of contents to navigate (although
                     hypertext links can be used to jump between slides). Nor can
                     the content of a PowerPoint be exported as structured data,
                     only as a .pdf, .rtf or a .mov format. I can’t query all my
                     bullet points or search all my headers — the data in the
                     presentation is not structured, it is merely styled.
                     However, the basic slide unit is extremely flexible since
                     none of the data within it is linked to an external
                     structure. Thus editing is easy. Slides can be deleted,
                     duplicated, repeated, and re-sequenced as units. PowerPoint
                     is a flat data structure in which single slides are the
                     smallest structural unit. The argument structure is based on
                     that unit-by-unit sequence no matter how much manipulation
                     goes into the space inside the frames. We don’t want to
                     confuse the plane of discourse, the literal slide-based
                     structure, with that of reference, the argument made, but
                     rather, call attention to how they are related. The literal,
                     linear, sequence <em class="emph">of</em> the slides does not cancel
                     the possibility of resonance among features <em class="emph">in</em>
                     the slides, but the two are distinct aspects of the
                     format.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p31">31</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p31"> By contrast, a content management system (designed to do
                     just what this descriptive phrase implies, make it possible
                     to work effectively with intellectual content), has multiple
                     levels of structure and granularity. Drupal, a common
                     content management system (CMS), is at a considerable remove
                     from PowerPoint in terms of complexity. What is the basic
                     unit of structure? Drupal has a concept identified as the
                     "node" — which means any unit of content. That
                     might be a digital asset (an image or other file). But it
                     also might be a record (the structured, field-based form of
                     entering text about assets or as an asset in its own right).
                     Nodes are structural, but not semantic; they serve the
                     purpose of giving the smallest unit of content an identity
                     without constraining it according to what it contains. These
                     units of content can be assembled in many ways.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p32">32</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p32"> Because the Drupal platform is a front end for putting
                     structured content into a database, it is also a means of
                     structuring the database itself. So, if I have thirty-five
                     images and thirty-five comments on them, I can store these
                     as separate nodes and associate them by calling the fields
                     "image" and "comment" through a query. This is
                     basic database activity, and the Drupal environment can
                     perform these kinds of operations down to the most detailed
                     level of granularity provided the data is structured
                     properly. Continue with the example of images and comments:
                     suppose they are about related but different fields (images
                     of geological formations from different processes of
                     formation — volcanic activity, silting, erosion, uplift). I
                     can pull out subsets of the slides that match search
                     criteria for each kind of geological formation provided I
                     have included information about that subdivision in the
                     data. That might be an abstract code — I might just number
                     the different processes from 1 to 4 and assign each image
                     and comment to a group, then call them by group without
                     referencing any linguistic term. That would be a structural
                     way to organize the information. I might create a field on
                     the image and comment records that says geological period,
                     and thus sort by term. At the same time, the images might be
                     used for other purposes — say for organizing hikes or
                     pointing out mineral deposits. In Drupal any node or unit of
                     content (e.g. image) can be associated with any topic
                     through use of what are called taxonomy terms. Thus I can
                     take a single image and associate it with volcanic activity,
                     rough terrain for climbing, and pumice, giving it a place
                     within multiple areas of potential use. But each context has
                     to be specified in advance in the data structure in the CMS.
                     By contrast, in the presentation mode of PowerPoint, I can
                     re-use and repeat images on the fly, and recontextualize
                     them readily because the authoring environment is not
                     constrained by taxonomies. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p33">33</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p33"> This is a very preliminary and minimal description of the
                     most basic structure of a database driven CMS (in this case,
                     the Drupal environment) and its expression of the relational
                     nature of the underlying database. Drupal’s "discursive
                     modalities" are not reducible to this database any
                     more than PowerPoint’s "text" is reducible to the
                     slide-by-slide structure. But in both cases, there are
                     statements that can be made and statements that cannot,
                     given the constraints of design.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p34">34</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p34"> Taking the example of the thirty-five images again, suppose
                     I decide that I want to create an online exhibit about my
                     rock collection, but only some of the images in the set are
                     ones for which I have samples, and my samples, which I am
                     currently photographing, are not in Drupal yet. Suppose the
                     description of these samples includes information that was
                     not in my geological sample set. I want to recount every
                     place and circumstance, provenance and camping trip, for my
                     personal rock collection as well as my history as a
                     rock-hound within a long family tradition. I have to create
                     a new record format or modify my original record to include
                     whole new categories, and create taxonomy terms that might
                     be elaborated according to year, trip, location, other
                     companions, events and adventures that are all irrelevant to
                     the first set of records. What if the two sets of records
                     overlap, but not completely? I have to go back to the record
                     design with the new purpose in mind. No longer am I making
                     an argument about geological processes, but now, about
                     rock-collecting as an experience. One is structured in
                     discrete units of information, and the other has a narrative
                     framework. Where does the narrative live? In the individual
                     records? Or in its own records, as a text? Every decision
                     calls the conceptual structure of the discourse into
                     question, asks that it be made explicit in the way the
                     information is structured and also related in the actions I
                     can take through the dashboard and various (several, in
                     Drupal’s case) administrative portals. Drupal is extensively
                     customizable — but only on its own terms, and that is the
                     point. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p35">35</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p35"> PowerPoint has no such complicated relational data structure
                     in its organization. It might even appear so simple that it
                     may take a conceptual leap to realize that it
                     <em class="emph">is</em> a platform able to store and display a
                     range of data formats, a bunch of visual effects, and all
                     kinds of recorded temporal instructions for play. PowerPoint
                     is a black box in that sense as surely as Drupal, it is just
                     a simpler platform conceptually and technically. Drupal’s
                     little cousins, WordPress and Omeka, are designed to be more
                     intuitive and easier to learn, which means they allow fewer
                     choices for customizing what can be done in their platforms.
                     WordPress has very little sort/search and digital asset
                     management capacity, so it does not allow for the kind of
                     complex relations and allegiances that can be created in the
                     Drupal nodes. Omeka comes with a certain standard of
                     metadata, Dublin Core, built into it. A basic
                     bibliographical standard, Dublin Core works well to describe
                     most digitized assets in the textual humanities, but it
                     won’t work for describing my rock collection, my collecting
                     adventures, or to allow me to link an image of a beautiful
                     hunk of volcanic rock to multiple taxonomies for search,
                     sort, and display. That will have to be done in Omeka
                     through a different mechanism. Also, the structure, ontology
                     and interface of Omeka impose a specific sense of cultural
                     heritage or humanities materials. A key organizational
                     structure consists of collections and items, and the
                     interface normally presents items separately (literally
                     boxed). Among other things, this structure privileges the
                     individuality of the items rather than their connections and
                     overlaps, which in turn structures the narrative and
                     argumentative possibilities. The conceptual architecture of
                     Drupal is combinatoric, linked, and highly granular, and its
                     data processing capacity is industrial strength. It is made
                     to work with enormous repositories of digital assets and to
                     provide or link to many services for their use, some
                     supplied by yet another layer of software (a common one is
                     Islandora, which supports many common operations for digital
                     asset management, such as storage of multiple metadata
                     standards and crosswalks). 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p36">36</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p36"> This discussion of a tiny glimpse of the workings of these
                     very different but common platforms (PowerPoint, Omeka, and
                     Drupal) may feel more like a quick look under the hood than
                     a discussion of argument. But these cannot be pulled apart.
                     Drupal’s web of associated assets (nodes) and their
                     repurposing within one context after another, though
                     flexible, is difficult to manage and all has to be scripted.
                     I can’t go into the Drupal repository, for instance, and
                     view all the image assets laid out as if they were units on
                     a light table. Nor can I rearrange them the way I can with
                     PowerPoint slides until I arrive at an order that argues my
                     points. I have to know what I want to call into my argument
                     and make that part of the data in the database, and part of
                     the views, frames, panels, and links of selection and
                     display. Drupal’s arguments take shape in the way the fields
                     are defined in records, the way taxonomies are created to
                     relate content, and the ways the displays can order and
                     sequence information. Moving from one structured unit of
                     Drupal content in a display to another cannot be animated.
                     It can be linked, down to the most minute detail. Navigation
                     through a Drupal site can be as a complicated as any web of
                     connections. Drupal content can be repurposed endlessly,
                     output in XML and other structured formats, while the
                     integrity of the content of every node remains intact. In
                     the PowerPoint instance my content is locked into the
                     structure of the presentation and no explicit data structure
                     exists, no metadata, no relational framework except for
                     sequence. In the Drupal instance, the content is independent
                     of the presentation, but locked into the data structure.
                     Other, very different, ways to take the same information
                     into argument structures would be to use XML or a
                     spreadsheet to create a format for storing the information.
                     The notion of a "content model" in XML requires that
                     the document elements define the intellectual shape of the
                     information with varying degrees of complexity, but within a
                     nested hierarchical tree, while a spreadsheet’s rows and
                     columns format assumes a similar uniformity of categories of
                     information and instances, but does not allow for attributes
                     or element groupings that give every piece of information in
                     an XML document a specific identity.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p37">37</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p37"> Structuring information in any of these formats already
                     creates an argument, according to the terms of classical
                     rhetoric whose terms are: <em class="emph">invention, arrangement,
                        style, memory</em>, and <em class="emph">delivery</em>.
                     Combining the structured data with a discursive format — an
                     "exhibit" in Omeka, a "view" and/or
                     "panel" or "book" in Drupal, a "report"
                     from a spreadsheet, or an XSLT transformation from XML,
                     takes advantage of every feature of rhetorical activity. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p38">38</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p38"> 1) First, <em class="emph">invention</em>: the very names and
                     distinctions among fields or categories, has determined what
                     the granular units are for use in the argument. If I keep
                     city and state together in a location name, then I am
                     arguing for their linkage in the argument structure, saying
                     they must always work together in identifying a location,
                     for instance. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p39">39</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p39"> 2) <em class="emph">Arrangement:</em> this corresponds to the layout
                     and conventions each middleware platform enables. A
                     spreadsheet report has very little layout capability, while
                     a Drupal view organizes the data selections and displays
                     them in various column templates (1, 2, 3 etc. and
                     side-by-side or stacked and so on). But what if I want to
                     introduce an anomaly? Change the layout of a view because
                     the image is particularly dramatic or I happen to have
                     several views of that location? I have to engineer the
                     anomaly and put a custom template into the system. Default
                     options have a way of winning out for convenience’s sake. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p40">40</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p40"> 3) <em class="emph">Style</em>: features of middleware platforms can
                     be customized to varying degrees. Most content management
                     systems (Omeka, Drupal, WordPress), have "themes"
                     designed by their developer communities. These establish
                     basic features, such as headers, sidebars, font, and image
                     sizes (the thumbnail image display default in Omeka is a
                     square, a feature that is better fitted to documentary
                     photography than the display of artworks). 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p41">41</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p41"> 4) and 5) <em class="emph">Memory</em> and <em class="emph">Delivery</em>:
                     these functions of classical rhetoric are manifest in file
                     formats. Screen resolutions, size, and the ability to have
                     multiple versions or derivatives of image or map files, for
                     instance, are all part of the arsenal of digital rhetoric.
                     Likewise, the traditional, forceful use of gestures,
                     pronunciation, and inflection translates from oral
                     performance to the pinch, swipe, automated slide show (a
                     horror), or other elements of the on-screen display and ways
                     these produce effects. Drop down menus or pick lists,
                     controlled vocabulary or search on strings? These are part
                     of the argument structure across all categories of classical
                     rhetoric, beginning with invention and arrangement. 
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Making Arguments</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p42">42</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p42">Making intellectual middleware can be seen as work connecting
                     materials/data and intellectual questions with material
                     manifestations. As pointed out above, middleware is neither
                     the interface (front-end display), nor the material
                     ("contents"), but the protocols that structure our
                     arguments and express thinking. The design of these
                     protocols (which are linked to data and interface) provides
                     a crucial opportunity to consider what kind of
                     "world/s" we want the platform or tool to
                     represent. It seems worthwhile to spend time on such
                     reflection and design since it affects (or even determines)
                     the data structures and interface. This is also where we can
                     envision versions of research and pedagogy beyond what is
                     built into conventional tools and established interpretative
                     frameworks.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p43">43</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p43">Let’s say a teacher of philology wants to raise the question
                     of how reconstructed linguistic forms present particular
                     ways of thinking about language evolution and human culture.
                     This teacher has access to a comprehensive database of
                     reconstructed Indo-European roots with meanings assigned to
                     them and actual linguistic forms from various (assumed)
                     daughter languages over time. Below we briefly outline four
                     types of intellectual middleware (and implementations) in
                     response to this challenge. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p44">44</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p44">The simplest type of middleware would just structure access
                     to this content, for instance facilitating a query
                     interface, allowing students to search for meanings,
                     language distribution of words with search results listed in
                     a table. This could be a useful exploratory tool to allow
                     students to search for different meanings and see what
                     Indo-European roots correspond to such meanings and how
                     these roots are represented in different languages at
                     different times, but would emphasize the words as atomic
                     units.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p45">45</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p45">In a second example, a developed form of this idea (a
                     slightly different type of middleware) could also include
                     aggregated values enabling users to see how reconstructed
                     forms are distributed over languages based on the whole
                     database, which would make it possible to see the structural
                     underpinnings of the reconstructive paradigm more clearly.
                     The relations among languages would be foregrounded in this
                     instance.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p46">46</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p46">A third variety of middleware would start out from models for
                     linguistic change. Traditional philology is based on a
                     branching or tree metaphor (languages diverge and branches
                     split into sub-branches). If another model of linguistic
                     change — such as change based on diffusion (wave model) —
                     was also incorporated, different models could be juxtaposed,
                     explored and illustrated in relation to the available data.
                     The basic models would be part of the platform (hardcoded),
                     and while these could not be changed, students would be able
                     to explore different world views. An understanding of
                     linguistic processes over time and space has to be included
                     in the model. This structuring presentation would emphasize
                     evolution and change over time as well as different models
                     of language change.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p47">47</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p47">In the fourth example of intellectual middleware, this point
                     about student activity is pushed further. Imagine that
                     students were asked to build models of change themselves
                     based on the forms in the daughter languages ("real",
                     not reconstructed forms) contained in the database. For
                     practical reasons, these models would have to be limited and
                     not all-inclusive. Through using a simple algorithmic
                     platform, students would construct this model through a
                     series of rules and conditions, and the data could then be
                     run through the model. In this case, the student-generated
                     model could be contrasted with the model established in
                     traditional philology. The partial nature of knowledge, the
                     non-linear patterns of language change, and multiple ways
                     languages influence each other and shift inconsistently
                     might become apparent.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p48">48</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p48">Depending on what approach and middleware we select, the
                     learning experience (and the actual implementation) will be
                     quite different. A key point here is that it is vital to
                     consider different options carefully before building the
                     actual system (and ideally before putting together the
                     dataset). Even supposedly basic concepts of digital assets
                     as discrete items, parts of relations of derivation, moments
                     in processes of diffusion, and objects of analysis of change
                     are all arguments that structure the way a field of
                     knowledge is thought of and the way the display of such
                     knowledge is modeled and thus experienced. The data
                     structures and protocols are reinforced by the design of the
                     entire system, from back-end data to access, display, and
                     use.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p49">49</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p49"> We could extend this analysis into greater detail with
                     regard to any of the examples we have sketched so briefly,
                     or add others. Online learning platforms, for instance,
                     often more focused on distribution of information and
                     tracking students than enacting modern pedagogical thinking,
                     are rarely questioned in terms of the structuring they
                     impose. But we can also extend these to the physical domain.
                     What if I am making an argument that is neither a
                     presentation nor a web display, but a spatial experience?
                     What is the process of structuring content to make an
                     argument that opens across time/space parameters in a
                     spatial situation? Cecilia Lindhé points to how classical
                     rhetorical devices can help structure experiences that are
                     spatially bound [<a class="ref" href="#lindh%C3%A92015">Lindhé 2015</a>]. She built an
                     academic installation in HUMlab to explore pre-print notions
                     of church spaces in relation to Virgin Mary as a virtuous
                     role model in medieval Sweden. Rich archival material is
                     enacted in the lab space through a series of experiential
                     platforms (using display, interaction and sensor
                     technology). The idea was not to build a reconstruction of
                     church spaces or to account for all of the archival material
                     or to build a web platform, but rather to allow participants
                     to respond to central research questions through an
                     experiential modality.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p50">50</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p50">Furthermore, the conditioning provided by software-based
                     intellectual middleware such as presentation software also
                     affects physical space. Slide-based software, as discussed
                     above, is tightly coupled with certain material and spatial
                     configurations. The single slide paradigm normally
                     correlates with a single screen physical setup. For
                     instance, PowerPoint does not facilitate arguments spread
                     over many screens. An art historian interested in using
                     three separate screens in order to juxtapose three artistic
                     traditions, perspectival notions or artists cannot to do so
                     running PowerPoint on a single computer. Three instances of
                     PowerPoint (on separate computers) could be used to carry
                     out the suggested juxtaposition. However, this would not
                     only be clunky, but almost beyond the capabilities of
                     PowerPoint since the software does not support coordination
                     of argument structures in multiple-screen environments.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p51">51</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p51">In HUMlab at Umeå University there are a number of
                     alternative display setups including eleven screens
                     peripherally placed in a performance space, a triptych
                     screen next to a floor screen and an angled two-screen
                     setup. These setups challenge traditional cinematic and
                     scientific modes of visualization through their very
                     existence and have been used for scholarly projects, large
                     events and artistic installations. For instance, the new
                     angled screen setup with a large stereo projection screen
                     flanked by a large, tall screen (implemented by two
                     projectors on top of each other) in an oblong studio space
                     challenges the immersive, singular paradigm strongly
                     associated with scientific visualization. The setup also
                     challenges the oftentimes physical separation of production
                     and use/enactment in high-end digital projects and the
                     common focus on single platforms in the digital humanities
                     If we are "inside" a platform how do we engage
                     critically with the conditions and design of that
                     experience?<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e658">[5]</a> We
                     suggest that the infrastructure in itself is a reflection of
                     such intellectual middleware and the middleware in its
                     instantiated form helps us think. Imagine running an
                     elaborate virtual model, like Rome Reborn, on the stereo
                     projection screen and using the second screen for critical
                     annotation, ongoing discussion of the ontology behind the
                     platform and focusing on details of the scenes being
                     rendered on the main screen — instead of projecting it as a
                     unified immersive model. The precise setup of the space and
                     the infrastructure suggests certain expressive and critical
                     possibilities, and while the lack of very clear,
                     instrumental use can be provocative, it is key to
                     encouraging new scholarship and artwork. There is also a
                     software side to the display and interaction technology in
                     HUMlab and over the years a number of solutions (hardware,
                     software) have been used to create content for these setups. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p52">52</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p52">For a long time, however, there was one important piece
                     missing. A display system that made it easy to "sketch"
                     arguments in the various display and interaction spaces. In
                     2015, such a tool was built to enable participants in the
                     conference "Genres of Scholarly
                     Knowledge Production" to create arguments
                     embedded in the infrastructure that the venue offered [<a class="ref" href="#svensson2015">Svensson 2015</a>]. Use of software such as
                     PowerPoint was disallowed. The display system is the result
                     of middleware thinking just like the physical infrastructure
                     discussed above. It soon turned out that this tool was a
                     powerful help in thinking how different arguments and
                     experiences could be enacted in HUMlab. The tool contains a
                     schematic representation of the spaces and management of
                     decks of media, but it is clear that the live 3D simulation
                     of the space with content (built in Unity, another platform)
                     adds very significantly to the usefulness and exploratory
                     power of the system. Importantly, the tool as middleware
                     also provides conditioning for the scholarly arguments made
                     through the system. For example, although the tool could be
                     used with only one screen or without any digital media at
                     all (keeping everything dark and silent), the foregrounding
                     on multiple screens/interactions points in the software and
                     the configuration of the physical space strongly suggest the
                     use of those resources). The event as a whole became a
                     lively intellectual discussion of middleware – of how ideas,
                     data and representation come together – and this would not
                     have been as successful had not the participants had to
                     engage with alternative modes of knowledge production. The
                     event was designed to lay bare some of the intellectual
                     middleware. Optimizing the use of such a system, however,
                     takes an investment on the part of the author and users who
                     have to design their presentations taking these capabilities
                     into account. 
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Middleware as Enunciative System</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p53">53</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p53">Critical awareness of the constraints of middleware can be
                     taken a step further if we consider their operation as
                     features of an enunciative system. The concept of
                     enunciation arises from structural linguistics, and is used
                     to describe the way "subjects" speak and are spoken in
                     relation to each other in discourse. The classic work in
                     this field, by Emile Benveniste, focused on the role of
                     pronouns in creating positionality and relations in speech
                     acts. Rather than confining language or middleware systems
                     to the role of communication — as if they were merely
                     vehicles for the delivery of information — analysis of their
                     operation as enunciative systems takes into account the fact
                     that any act of discourse creates a subject as an effect. A
                     subject, in this post-structuralist analysis, is
                     <em class="emph">spoken</em> by an utterance, created
                     relationally. Theories of enunciation take into account the
                     power relations of language and representational systems
                     (visual perspective is a powerful system of enunciation, for
                     instance, in the way it creates viewing positions to be
                     occupied). 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p54">54</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p54"> The theory was widely used in film theory and analysis
                     (borrowing directly from linguistics) where the
                     "subject" of the various semiotic systems were
                     structured into point of view (of shots, narrative, sound,
                     editing). Thinking about information systems and middleware
                     from this perspective seems useful as a way to insist on the
                     dynamic and constitutive nature of their operation. Rather
                     than reify the features of PowerPoint, Drupal, or
                     spreadsheets, this approach allows us to ask who is
                     speaking, to whom, and for what purpose, in any situation of
                     information and digital design, and also, who is the created
                     or posited subject of that act of enunciation. Who is the
                     implied "you" of any display? Where and how is that
                     spoken subject positioned? The introduction of this concept
                     moves away from "user experience" as a mechanistic
                     study of eye-tracking or tactile satisfaction and rewards,
                     and towards a psychoanalytic understanding of dialogic
                     relations as power relations. For example, the subject
                     spoken by a health care database created without regard for
                     transgender, for instance, imposes a violation on the
                     identity of individuals who identify as neither male or
                     female. The use of data structures to describe geological
                     formations might perform an equally violent act of disregard
                     for traditional uses or conceptions of a landscape within an
                     indigenous community. Taking the stance that all acts of
                     information structuring and modeling be considered acts of
                     enunciation allows the transactional performativity of their
                     effects to be taken into account. Speaking, viewing, and use
                     of middleware are constitutive activities, not simply
                     mechanistic exchanges among autonomous agents. The
                     construction of information systems is not just about
                     representing different value systems, but enacting them
                     situationality. Again, in the physical space this is
                     palpable, as individuals and groups cluster around positions
                     that are advantageous to their purposes — secrecy,
                     visibility, privacy etc. according to sightlines, power
                     positions, surveillance lines and so on. 
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Extending Arguments</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p55">55</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p55">Though very preliminary in its analysis, this paper has tried
                     to make a few basic points that we hope will provoke future
                     critical discussion. First, middleware is a material
                     manifestation of enunciative systems that enact positions
                     and power relations in spatial, virtual, and digital
                     discourses. Second, we should make a distinction between
                     apparent and transparent aspects of middleware. The first,
                     like the basic single frame structure of PowerPoint, are
                     visible but overlooked. The second, like the way query
                     structures work, is rendered almost invisible. We are trying
                     make these equally visible. Third, we think middleware
                     should be looked at in terms of the behaviors and actions
                     they support, beginning with the authoring environment (do I
                     conceive of my argument in terms of slides from a selection
                     of 300, or in terms of the data structure, or in fields in
                     the metadata, as taxonomies, or relations among
                     components?). What is the impact of my choice of middleware
                     on what I can or cannot "say" in my project and
                     presentation or what the user can know about these argument
                     structures undergirding their experience? How are decisions
                     about the model of the content made, and the connection
                     between the selection of content and a whole or final
                     presentation enabled? How does that act register, become
                     defined, constrained, and rhetorically significant? How do
                     the structuring properties of the platform organize the
                     composition (and inform it from the outset). A blog entry is
                     not a Drupal site is not a Twitter feed. We "think" a
                     PowerPoint slide differently than we do a record for
                     describing images in a collection. The argument is neither
                     techno-determinism nor media specificity, but a call to look
                     at the performative aspects of these platforms in the way
                     they condition us to work within their forms as well as in
                     the ways they enact argument as structures.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p56">56</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p56"> Ultimately, we are arguing that all presentation space is
                     rhetorically configured (and should be engaged critically).
                     This is true of the regimented scrolling linearity of Word,
                     which expects prose text, and the flexible arrangements
                     possible in PowerPoint, or the template structure of
                     InDesign, which assumes a document consisting of many
                     related pages working in sequence but across a consistent
                     format where intertextual elements are in play. Consider the
                     overview functions in each environment. The slide sorter in
                     PPT, which assumes each slide is an entity, and the
                     continuous stream of text in Word, displayed in the page
                     view, permit a sense of omniscience that is never possible
                     in Drupal. No overview exists there, only views into the
                     data through the content list or other features. Also
                     consider novelty effects, for instance, in Prezi. Does
                     turning a virtual "cube" to display a new face/facet
                     have any correlation with the semantic value this implies?
                     Is the argument on display really "cubical"? Does it
                     have six sides? Are the relations that structure the display
                     the same as those that organize the elements of the
                     argument? We know of very few six-sided arguments, though of
                     course, one might make one, deliberately, to explore this
                     point. And then, might also wonder what is inside that cube
                     whose "faces" we have seen — what is the content of
                     that virtual volume? The silliness of this exposes the value
                     of the investigation into the structuring rhetorics of
                     middleware.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p57">57</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p57">Keep in mind that middleware is not interface. Middleware
                     consists of protocols and processes that support and
                     structure the content <em class="emph">and</em> context of use.
                     Interface is the front end, the final experience, and rarely
                     gives any insight into the infrastructure back-end.
                     Middleware is the in-between that sets terms/conditions of
                     organization and structuring. We could elaborate further by
                     taking specific cases, wonderful examples of highly
                     developed digital humanities work (e.g. <cite class="title italic">Die Fackel, Old Bailey, Perseus Project, Whitman
                        Archive</cite>) and look at the way the intellectual
                     models of their content and use are argued within the
                     structure of their platforms, not just in their final
                     display.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p58">58</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p58">At stake are other issues as well, such as long-term
                     sustainability. Many of the middleware platforms are
                     destined for (or used with disregard for) rapid
                     obsolescence. File formats last longer than platforms, so
                     storing content separately from platforms is a wise
                     investment. Creating highly specific middleware platforms,
                     for instance, those for three-dimensional reconstruction of
                     historic sites, that then "hold" content, may prove to
                     be an investment with little long-term return. The models
                     are spatial, and assume space as a given, using it as an
                     armature for placement of notes, primary materials, and so
                     on. But how can this be edited? Output? The middleware locks
                     the content into a structure that may not even be an
                     argument, just an assumed given [<a class="ref" href="#kirschenbaum2008">Kirschenbaum 2008</a>]. Metadata schemes,
                     elaborately conceived according to models of an archive, a
                     field, a disciplinary domain, sometimes turn out to be
                     unusable (all those iterations of DTDs in the early stages
                     of digital humanities) because their intellectual structure
                     was at such odds with the experiential engagement with the
                     material objects they were meant to represent. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p59">59</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p59">Also at stake is the question of what arguments we want to
                     make and how we might create environments that support them.
                     Contrast, comparison, details, close and distant approaches
                     to analysis, reading, and even the collaborative character
                     of scholarship, partial knowledge and blurred boundaries
                     among types of knowledge or objects are all parts of our
                     interpretative habits and traditions. Are these argument
                     structures supported by current platforms? Can we think of
                     other types of arguments we want to make and if so, how
                     could these be manifested? What about traditional humanistic
                     compositional strategies such as producing evidence, trails
                     of associated materials, counter-arguments, commentary,
                     asides and alternative arguments? There are several reasons
                     why it is difficult to consider argumentative needs in
                     relation to digital platforms. Firstly, argumentative
                     structures and material manifestations cannot be easily
                     separated, which means that both need to be considered at
                     the same time. We suggest that the idea of intellectual
                     middleware can help this process as it sits in between
                     materials and interface. A second difficulty is to
                     simultaneously critique and create middleware and digital
                     platforms. Here we suggest that we need to expand our
                     practice to incorporate design processes that more clearly
                     integrate conceptual, critical and material sensibilities.
                     It must be easy to critique and make at the same time and
                     the digital humanities needs to be agile and experimental
                     (especially at early stages of projects) as well as
                     long-term sustainable and capable of managing large-scale
                     projects.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p60">60</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p60"> Intellectual middleware sits in between back end (data,
                     concepts, research concepts) and front end (interface),
                     which means that middleware cannot be seen as separate from
                     these other levels or from the broader cultural, social and
                     material world. Not only does middleware reflect cultural
                     and social systems in their making, but it is also enacted
                     and interpreted together with other people (whether in the
                     same room or not) in particular contexts. There is always an
                     ideational and intellectual side to middleware, and
                     middleware is always situated socially and culturally. The
                     intellectual inflection of middleware always has to have
                     some relation to an intended material instantiation and to
                     any available data and will therefore be more tangible than
                     "abstract thought." Looking at the material
                     inflection of intellectual middleware, it would similarly
                     normally not be "concrete matter," but rather the
                     structuring of such matter. In fact, ideally these
                     inflections will come together in the articulation of
                     protocols, principles and structures. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p61">61</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p61">An example can be provided by thinking of various principles
                     of manipulation or engagement that could be situated at the
                     level of middleware. These might include layering,
                     perspectivation, extensible juxtaposition, opacity and
                     scale. In the philological example discussed earlier,
                     juxtaposition would be an important principle for
                     considering and comparing different models of language
                     change, which in turn would be materially manifested in the
                     interface. Similarly, an alternative type of presentation
                     software for art history and theory might be based around
                     this principle — extensible juxtaposition — to allow the
                     comparison of different periods, pieces of art or artists
                     (drawing on the traditional dual use of slide projectors
                     extended to realize the dream of Mnemosyne envisioned by
                     Abby Warburg in the 1920s [<a class="ref" href="#johnson2015">Johnson 2015</a>].
                     Layering of information is another important principle,
                     which is both conceptual and material. Layering is key to
                     geographical information systems, but could be used more
                     extensively than now to break down the "flatness" of
                     many digital projects and to enable the provision of
                     critical readings, annotation, and an awareness of how
                     different datasets contribute to the establishment of a
                     seemingly singular point of view. Another way of deepening
                     data analysis and interpretative power is to engage with
                     different perspectives of a data set or a research challenge
                     simultaneously, rather than approaching digital projects
                     with the goal of a single outcome. A scholar interested in
                     representations of the struggles of any particular culture
                     or sub-culture may want to enact alternative viewpoints
                     based on materials from the community in question as well as
                     different governmental bodies and not just give access to
                     the materials or ready-made positions, but enact different
                     perspectives. In terms of interface this could be done
                     through using multiple screens (one for each perspective).
                     Or as a scholar at Umeå University working on this theme
                     suggested when seeing the HUMlab angled screenscape with its
                     3D projection screen and associated glasses for the first
                     time: have each pair of glasses call up a different
                     perspective and worldview.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p62">62</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p62">In interface theory, a basic design decision is made between
                     "showing" the knowledge structure/organization of
                     the information in a site/collection/project (maps,
                     photographs, documents etc.) and presenting options for
                     behaviors (search, browse, display etc.). In general, simply
                     making the collection contents available is like sending a
                     museum viewer into the storeroom. The organizational
                     structure imposed by the registrar (in the museum example)
                     can be made more useful to a user through supporting
                     behaviors ("Show me all paintings by
                     Rembrandt," rather than "Let
                     me into the shelving area where all works of Renaissance
                     art are stored by size"). The behaviors to be
                     supported, it turns out, are not those that depend upon
                     memory, but rather, those that support search and use.
                     Memory doesn’t work effectively through structures but
                     instead through processes, cues to behavior generate
                     response. The arguments of middleware are protocols of use
                     that talk to the memory structures, the shaped, already
                     processed, arguments of the digital assets. Then the
                     middleware features produce a secondary argument through
                     language/presentation in a graphical, spatial, or audial
                     interface where hierarchy, proximity, juxtaposition, scale,
                     sequence, proportion, color and timing of display are
                     enabled by the click, drag, drop, enter, search, and play
                     functions that order our behavior. In all of these, we are
                     subjects spoken by a system — of rules and positions that
                     discipline our authoring process and the intellectual
                     arguments we can produce. Each platform permits some things
                     and not others. Middleware shapes our access to inventory,
                     organization of materials and of their mustering into use,
                     of the style in the particulars of discourse, of memory in
                     the roles of refresh, recovery, and rate of display, and of
                     delivery in the specifics of responsive design, timing,
                     tactile interface and so on. But it also programs us to
                     perform our arguments to conform with the learned habits of
                     its features and formats.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p63">63</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p63"> As to enunciation? It is always context co-dependent. It
                     relies on "shifters" — terms whose value can only be
                     determined in situ. "I" and "you" are such
                     shifters (by contrast to she/he/they/them which may take on
                     a stable relation to their referents). Space and time,
                     here/there, now/then are shifters, though the second term in
                     each pair can be given a stable referent. These shifters are
                     constituting structures of discourse. Because the "you"
                     is always being created in the process of speaking,
                     constructed, positioned, defined, it is linked to an
                     articulating "I" which is also in process. The dynamic
                     between them can change their relation to the power and
                     meaning of the language act. Linguists intent on finding
                     features of "language" as a universal human system note
                     that the distinction between I/you is something that is
                     present, at the very least, implicit, in every human
                     language system. If we suggest that middleware contains
                     rules for conditions of utterance, of production, then we
                     ask who occupies the "I" or "you" position in any
                     digital enunciation? You know that only by being present to
                     the utterance, or its representation, that a place holder is
                     filled by the speaker. This matters because the production
                     of enunciated discourse also produces and enunciated
                     subject, that is, not an individual, but a position in
                     relation to the discourse, its power structures, and its
                     operations. For Julia Kristeva, this formed the basis of the
                     analysis of the subject in a politics of linguistics and
                     semiotics. For Jacques Lacan, this became the foundation of
                     a theory of the subject of language. Neither assumed a
                     speaker who uses language <em class="emph">as a subject</em>, but
                     rather, see the constitution <em class="emph">of a subject</em> as a
                     language act. (Language is not something the subject uses,
                     but something that makes the human subject.) This changes
                     the dynamic production of a subject through enunciation that
                     can also be identified in the structuring principles of
                     interface and middleware.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p64">64</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p64"> Teasing out the precise modes of address that middleware
                     builds into its protocols so that these are manifest in an
                     interface is a little tricky — I/you he/she are present in
                     language, but seeing/describing the working of point of view
                     systems of the graphics, the positioning of viewers into a
                     place/time, suturing and interpellation of subjects into
                     discourse is more complicated. If a web page offers a window
                     with an ad in which I am directly addressed by the language,
                     the look of the actors, and by a direct bid for my
                     involvement in either playing, pausing, or closing the
                     window, then "I" am being addressed as a "you"
                     within the structure of the discourse. But just as surely,
                     the apparently neutral display devices of a newspaper page
                     do the same things, they are just harder to spot. Why does
                     it matter? In every instance of communication, someone is
                     being addressed by someone for some purpose and the agendas
                     of this constitutive work are generally obscured by the
                     familiarity of the discourse structures. The power relations
                     disappear behind conventions.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p65">65</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p65"> We need to be attentive to such structuring when planning
                     and building digital tools and platforms. Intellectual
                     middleware can help us be more attentive to structuring
                     across concept, data and interface. Importantly, middleware
                     should not just appear or be taken for granted, but needs to
                     be the result of intellectual, iterative and materially
                     grounded processes incorporating appropriate expertise and
                     infrastructure.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Conclusion</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p66">66</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p66">In conclusion, we hope that by introducing the notion of
                     middleware we can address some of the processes, visible and
                     less so, that are shaping argument structures in digital
                     humanities projects. Middleware has intellectual, technical,
                     practical, and experiential dimensions. Our hope is that
                     strong middleware work will result in better tools for
                     sketching, thinking and composing for the humanities as well
                     as a higher degree of critical awareness in relation to
                     existing tools and platforms. As a community we are still in
                     the early phases of designing platforms for our work, and at
                     stake is <em class="emph">how</em> we may think as well as
                     <em class="emph">what</em> we may think as we struggle to design
                     environments that contain tools for thinking in arguments
                     rather than displays of thought whose production processes
                     disappear in the final view. 
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
            </div>
            
            <div id="notes">
               <h2>Notes</h2>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e274"><span class="noteRef">[1]</span> A striking contrast
                  is Donald Presziosi’s reading of the ritual
                  procession up the hill and through the Parthenon,
                  with the orchestrated eyelines and views, or certain
                  readings of the graphical structure of poetic works
                  as an integral semantic armature.
               </div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e286"><span class="noteRef">[2]</span> Supposing the "reading"
                  were as basic as putting all words in a text in
                  alphabetical order, something a computer does
                  handily, and which, then, would require a human
                  reader to interpret in a meaningful way <em class="emph">for
                     its structure</em> not merely its word
                  list.
               </div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e430"><span class="noteRef">[3]</span> A
                  project like the Walt Whitman Archive, for example, is
                  clearly research, substantive in all ways, but it is
                  never cited for its arguments, only as a resource. Its
                  makers would argue, and rightfully, I think, that it
                  does contain rhetorical features, but these are not
                  readily extracted or paraphrased.
               </div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e440"><span class="noteRef">[4]</span> Obviously in some circles such a
                  reading would be hailed as a triumph of conceptual work
                  and poetic imagination.
               </div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e658"><span class="noteRef">[5]</span> Precedent for this critical engagement
                  exists in the "apparatus" approach to cinema
                  studies that emerged in the 1970s and 1980s in work by
                  Jean-Louis Comolli, Jean Baudry, and others.
               </div>
            </div>
            <div id="worksCited">
               <h2>Works Cited</h2>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="chang2002">
                     <!-- close -->Change, Dooley, Tuovinen 2002</span> 
                  Chang, Dempsey, Laurence Dooley, and Juhani E. Tuovinen.
                  2002. "Gestalt Theory in Visual Screen
                  Design: A New Look at an Old Subject," July.
                  Australian Computer Society, Inc., 5–12.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="dourish2014">
                     <!-- close -->Dourish 2014</span> Dourish, Paul.
                  2014. "No Sql: The Shifting
                  Materialities Of Database Technology."
                  <cite class="title italic">Computational Culture</cite>, no. 4.
                  <a class="ref" href="http://computationalculture.net/article/no-sql-the-shifting-materialities-of-database-technology" onclick="window.open('http://computationalculture.net/article/no-sql-the-shifting-materialities-of-database-technology'); return false">http://computationalculture.net/article/no-sql-the-shifting-materialities-of-database-technology</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="emerson2014">
                     <!-- close -->Emerson 2014</span> Emerson, Lori.
                  2014. <cite class="title italic">Reading Writing Interfaces: From
                     the Digital tot the Bookbound</cite>. Minneapolis:
                  University of Minnesota Press.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="goldberg2015">
                     <!-- close -->Goldberg 2015</span> Goldberg,
                  David Theo. 2015. "World as Platform —
                  Genres of Scholarly Knowledge Production —
                  Medium."
                  <cite class="title italic">Genres of Scholarly Knowledge
                     Production (Online Collection)</cite>. <a class="ref" href="https://medium.com/genres-of-scholarly-knowledge-production/world-as-platform-da7f8a1f042e" onclick="window.open('https://medium.com/genres-of-scholarly-knowledge-production/world-as-platform-da7f8a1f042e'); return false">https://medium.com/genres-of-scholarly-knowledge-production/world-as-platform-da7f8a1f042e</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="johnson2015">
                     <!-- close -->Johnson 2015</span> Johnson,
                  Christopher D. 2015. "About the
                  Mnemosyne Atlas."
                  <cite class="title italic">Mnemosyne. Meanderings through Aby
                     Warburg’s Atlas</cite>. Accessed December 21. <a class="ref" href="http://warburg.library.cornell.edu/about" onclick="window.open('http://warburg.library.cornell.edu/about'); return false">http://warburg.library.cornell.edu/about</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="kirschenbaum2008">
                     <!-- close -->Kirschenbaum 2008</span> Kirschenbaum, Matthew G. 2008. <cite class="title italic">Mechanisms: New Media and the Forenstic
                     Imagination</cite>. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="klein2014">
                     <!-- close -->Klein 2014</span> Klein, L. F. 2014.
                  "The Image of Absence: Archival
                  Silence, Data Visualization, and James Hemings."
                  <cite class="title italic">American Literature</cite> 85 (4):
                  661–88.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="lerup1987">
                     <!-- close -->Lerup 1987</span> Lerup, Lars. 1987.
                  <cite class="title italic">Planned Assaults: The Nofamily
                     House, Love House Teexas Zero.</cite> Montreal:
                  Canadian Centre for Architecture.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="lindhé2015">
                     <!-- close -->Lindhé 2015</span> Lindhé, Cecilia.
                  "Medieval Materiality through the
                  Digital Lens."
                  <cite class="title italic">Between Humanities and the
                     Digital</cite>, David Theo Goldberg and Patrik
                  Svensson, eds. MIT Press, 2015. 193-204
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="mandell2012">
                     <!-- close -->Mandell 2012</span> Mandell, Laura.
                  2012. "How to Read a Literary
                  Visualisation: Network Effects in the Lake School of
                  Romantic Poetry."
                  <cite class="title italic">Digital Studies / Le Cthamp
                     Numérique</cite> 3 (2).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="mattern2007">
                     <!-- close -->Mattern 2007</span> Mattern,
                  Shannon. 2007. <cite class="title italic">The New Downtown
                     Library : Designing New Communities</cite>.
                  Minneapolis  Minn.; London: University of Minnesota
                  Press.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="mattern2014">
                     <!-- close -->Mattern 2014</span> Mattern,
                  Shannon. 2014. "Library as
                  Infrastructure."
                  <cite class="title italic">Places Journal</cite>, June. <a class="ref" href="https://placesjournal.org/article/library-as-infrastructure/" onclick="window.open('https://placesjournal.org/article/library-as-infrastructure/'); return false">https://placesjournal.org/article/library-as-infrastructure/</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="nietzsche1872">
                     <!-- close -->Nietzsche 1872</span> Nietzsche,
                  Friedrich. 1872. "Über Die Zukunft
                  Unserer Bildungsantstalten."
                  <cite class="title italic">The Nietzsche Channel</cite>. <a class="ref" href="                     http://www.thenietzschechannel.com/lectures/fed/fed-ger.htm" onclick="window.open('                     http://www.thenietzschechannel.com/lectures/fed/fed-ger.htm'); return false">
                     http://www.thenietzschechannel.com/lectures/fed/fed-ger.htm</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="portela2013">
                     <!-- close -->Portela 2013</span> Portela, Manuel.
                  2013. "Scripting Reading Motions: The
                  Codex and the Computer as Self-Reflexive
                  Machines," September. The MIT Press. <a class="ref" href="http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2568152" onclick="window.open('http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2568152'); return false">http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2568152</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="rentschler2004">
                     <!-- close -->Rentschler 2004</span> Rentschler, Carrie A. 2004. "Witnessing: US Citizenship and the Vicarious Experience
                  of Suffering."
                  <cite class="title italic">Media, Culture &amp; Society</cite> 26
                  (2): 296–304.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="robles-anderson2016">
                     <!-- close -->Robles-Anderson and Svensson 2016</span> Robles-Anderson, Erica, and
                  Patrik Svensson. 2016. "'One Damn
                  Slide After Another': PowerPoint at Every
                  Occasion for Speech."
                  <cite class="title italic">Computational Culture</cite>, no.
                  5.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="smith2007">
                     <!-- close -->Smith 2007</span> Smith, Martha Nell.
                  2007. "The Human Touch Software of the
                  Highest Order: Revisiting Editing as
                  Interpretation."
                  <cite class="title italic">Textual Cultures: Texts, Contexts,
                     Interpretation</cite> 2 (1). Society for Textual
                  Scholarship: 1–15. <a class="ref" href="https://muse.jhu.edu/journals/textual_cultures/v002/2.1.smith.html" onclick="window.open('https://muse.jhu.edu/journals/textual_cultures/v002/2.1.smith.html'); return false">https://muse.jhu.edu/journals/textual_cultures/v002/2.1.smith.html</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="sterne2012">
                     <!-- close -->Sterne 2012</span> Sterne, Jonathan.
                  2012. <cite class="title italic">MP3: The Meaning of a
                     Format</cite>. Durham: Duke University Press.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="svensson2011">
                     <!-- close -->Svensson 2011</span> Svensson,
                  Patrik. 2011. "From Optical Fibre to
                  Conceptual Cyberinfrastructure."
                  <cite class="title italic">Digital Humanities Quarterly</cite>.
                  The Alliance of Digital Humanities Organizations. <a class="ref" href="http://umu.diva-portal.org/smash/record.jsf?pid=diva2%3A446386&amp;dswid=5588" onclick="window.open('http://umu.diva-portal.org/smash/record.jsf?pid=diva2%3A446386&amp;dswid=5588'); return false">http://umu.diva-portal.org/smash/record.jsf?pid=diva2%3A446386&amp;dswid=5588</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="svensson2015">
                     <!-- close -->Svensson 2015</span> Patrik 2015.
                  "Genres of Scholarly Knowledge Production" Revisited.
                  Post-event curatorial statement for the GOSKP conference at
                  HUMlab, Umeå University, December 10–12, 2014. In the online
                  collection Genres of Scholarly Knowledge Production:
                  Post-conference dialogue after the Dec 10–12, 2014 event at
                  HUMlab.
                  <a class="ref" href="https://medium.com/genres-of-scholarly-knowledge-production/revisiting-genres-of-scholarly-knowledge-production-fd240e9631ec#.vyp6uw6ze" onclick="window.open('https://medium.com/genres-of-scholarly-knowledge-production/revisiting-genres-of-scholarly-knowledge-production-fd240e9631ec#.vyp6uw6ze'); return false"> https://medium.com/genres-of-scholarly-knowledge-production/revisiting-genres-of-scholarly-knowledge-production-fd240e9631ec#.vyp6uw6ze</a></div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="trace2002">
                     <!-- close -->Trace 2002</span> Trace, Ciaran B.
                  2002. "What Is Recorded Is Never Simply
                  'What Happened': Record Keeping in Modern
                  Organizational Culture."
                  <cite class="title italic">Archival Science</cite> 2 (1-2):
                  137–59.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="tufte2003">
                     <!-- close -->Tufte 2003</span> Tufte, Edward R.
                  2003. "The Cognitive Style of
                  PowerPoint."
                  <cite class="title italic">Sort</cite>, 28.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="wardrip-fruin2009">
                     <!-- close -->Wardrip-Fruin 2009</span> Wardrip-Fruin, Noah. 2009. <cite class="title italic">Expressive
                     Processing: Digital Fictions, Computer Games, and
                     Software Studies</cite>. Cambridge, MA: MIT
                  Press.
               </div>
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar"><a href="#">Preview</a>  |  <span style="color: grey">XML</span> |  <a href="#" onclick="javascript:window.print();" title="Click for print friendly version">Print Article</a></div>
         </div>
      </div>
   </body>
</html>