<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
      <title>[PREVIEW] DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly: </title>
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_screen.css" media="screen" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_print.css" media="print" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <style type="text/css">
        #mainContent {
          float: none;
          padding-top: 2em;
          padding-left: 4em;
          padding-right: 4em;
          margin-left: 225px;
           
        }</style>
   </head>
   <body>
      <div id="mainContent">
         
         
         [PREVIEW] DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly: 
         
         
         
         
         #mainContent {
         float: none;
         padding-top: 2em;
         padding-left: 4em;
         padding-right: 4em;
         margin-left: 225px;
         
         }
         
         
         
         
         
         [PREVIEW] DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly: 
         
         
         
         
         #mainContent {
         float: none;
         padding-top: 2em;
         padding-left: 4em;
         padding-right: 4em;
         margin-left: 225px;
         
         }
         
         
         
         
         
         [PREVIEW] DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly: 
         
         
         
         
         #mainContent {
         float: none;
         padding-top: 2em;
         padding-left: 4em;
         padding-right: 4em;
         margin-left: 225px;
         
         }
         
         
         
         
         
         [PREVIEW] DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly: 
         
         
         
         
         #mainContent {
         float: none;
         padding-top: 2em;
         padding-left: 4em;
         padding-right: 4em;
         margin-left: 225px;
         
         }
         
         
         
         
         Preview
         Preview  |  XML |  Print Article
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         2025-04-30
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         Adapting a Research Tool
         for Teaching in a Post-Pandemic World: 
         Textual Communities and Critical Digital Pedagogy
         in the Context of a Comprehensive Liberal Arts Research University
         
         
         
         Textual Communities and Critical Digital Pedagogy
         in the Context of a Comprehensive Liberal Arts Research University
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         Blurb for social media
         
         1
         How can digital tools originally developed for research reshape undergraduate
         teaching? The authors adapt the Textual Communities research-tool for using it
         in a paleography class, and reflect on critical digital pedagogy, hybrid
         learning environments, and the transformative potential of scholarly
         infrastructure in the classroom.
         
         
         
         
         Bios
         
         
         
         Barbara Bordalejo, University of
         Lethbridge, barbara.bordalejo@uleth.ca,
         https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8255-0265 
         
         2
         Barbara Bordalejo is a textual scholar, editor, and digital humanist whose
         work spans digital editing, manuscript studies, and the politics of
         knowledge production in the humanities. She holds PhDs from New York
         University and De Montfort University, and she is Director of the Canterbury
         Tales Project and Publishing Director at Scholarly Digital Editions.
         Currently an Adjunct Professor at the University of Lethbridge, she has
         previously held academic appointments in Canada, the UK, Belgium, and Italy.
         Her research interests include AI and data ethics in higher education, the
         application of bioinformatics to textual criticism, and intersectional
         feminist approaches to scholarly editing. Barbara serves as President of the
         Canadian Society for Digital Humanities and sits on the editorial board of
         Digital Scholarship in the Humanities. Her recent publications explore
         AI-assisted writing, digital pedagogy, and critical approaches to the
         unessay.
         
         
         
         
         Davide Pafumi, University of Lethbridge,
         davide.pafumi@uleth.ca, https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1113-187X
         
         3
         Davide Pafumi is a doctoral candidate at the University of Lethbridge
         specializing in medieval studies and Digital Humanities. His research
         focuses on medieval literature, historical linguistics, paleography, and
         computational approaches to address complex Humanities research questions.
         He serves as a research assistant to the “Canterbury Tales Project,” where
         he works on the transcription, editing, and encoding of the 88 pre-modern
         manuscripts in Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales textual tradition. Davide has
         received several prestigious awards in the field of medieval studies,
         including the 2023 Benton-Mahoney Award from the Medieval Association of the
         Pacific and the 2025 Founders Grant from the International Courtly
         Literature Society (North American Branch). In 2021, he graduated with
         Honours from the University of Padua, earning MA in English and German
         Linguistics and Literatures. 
         
         
         
         
         Morgan S. Pearce, University of Lethbridge,
         morgan.pearce@uleth.ca, https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1768-4501 
         
         4
         Morgan Slayde Pearce is a master’s student at the University of Lethbridge
         and a member of the Humanities Innovation Lab. She is a research assistant
         for the Lethbridge Journal Incubator and the “Canterbury Tales Project.” Her
         thesis combines medieval literary studies and game studies to look at how
         non-linear narratives in various genres and media are used to convey the
         experience of depression and loss, specifically through the use of the
         symbol of the labyrinth. Her research combines studies of the history of the
         book, medieval literature, game studies, and digital humanities. Morgan
         received the Alberta Graduate Excellence Scholarship in 2023 and the
         Benton-Mahoney Award from the Medieval Association of the Pacific in 2024.
         She graduated from the University of Lethbridge with her BA in English in
         2021 with Great Distinction.
         
         
         
         
         Daniel Paul O’Donnell, University of
         Lethbridge, daniel.odonnell@uleth.ca,
         https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0127-4893
         
         5
         Daniel Paul O’Donnell is a Professor of English and Department Chair at the
         University of Lethbridge. His research and teaching focuses on Digital
         Humanities, the formation and practice of the humanities, Open Science, and
         early medieval philology and textual criticism. He is the author of Cædmon’s
         Hymn, A Multimedia Archive, Edition, and Study (Medieval Academy of
         America/SEENET, 2005, and a co-author of Reading Peer Review: PLOS ONE and
         Institutional Change in Academia (Cambridge University Press, 2020). During
         the pandemic, he was PI on a Sloan-funded project examining how Open Science
         instruction was adapting to an online environment.
         
         
         
         
         
         Abstract
         
         6
         This article examines the pedagogical adaptation of Textual Communities, a
         digital tool originally developed for collaborative research in textual
         scholarship, to teach paleography at the undergraduate level within a liberal
         arts context. Prompted by the exigencies of remote learning during the COVID-19
         pandemic and the broader framework of critical digital pedagogy, the
         course-design reimagined the tool’s primary research-focused function —
         edition-making— as a dynamic teaching and learning environment emphasizing
         transcription, engagement, and student autonomy. The article presents a specific
         example of the use of a digital tool in teaching paleography, detailing its
         purpose and impact on student learning and engagement. The article offers a
         concrete case study of hybrid- and flexible-by-design pedagogy, showing the
         value of using scholarly digital tools in undergraduate settings.
         
         7
         Keywords: pedagogy, tools, transcription, manuscripts, infrastructure.
         
         
         
         
         Introduction
         
         8
         The changes experienced by teachers and studentsthe higher education community
         following the outbreak of COVID-19 remain unprecedented in light of its impact
         on different spheres of collective life. Paraphrasing Marcel Mauss, the pandemic
         stoodcan be viewed as a “total social fact” (Mauss, 1966, pp. 76–77),(Mauss,
         1966, pp. 76–77), playing a pivotal role in social change in light ofdue to its
         significant “implications throughout society” (Edgar and Sedgwick, 1999, p.
         64)(Edgar and Sedgwick, 1999, p. 64). Against this backdrop, this paper
         addresses the spheres of teaching digital humanities, specifically in the
         aftermath of the pandemic. 
         
         9
         In 2023, the departments of English and History at the University of Lethbridge
         approved an undergraduate advanced course, bothunder the leadership of Barbara
         Bordalejo, for English and History students, on paleography of the British Isles
         covering texts in Latin, Old French, Old and Middle English produced between 800
         and 1500 under the leadership of Barbara Bordalejo.. When designing the course,
         we decided to implementthe authors of this paper implemented Textual
         Communities, (Bordalejo and Robinson, 2016), a collaborative online research
         system wherethat allows participants canto work asynchronously, which we adapted
         for pedagogical purposes. Because of Bordalejo’s experience during the Fall of
         2021, when a surge of the COVID Delta variant forced all academic staff to pivot
         to online teaching, Textual Communities was as much about its pedagogical
         promise as its potential use as a distance learning tool. In this paper, we have
         drawndraw from aour practical experience of a course of this kind towith the
         platform and extrapolate a systematic discussion of itsthe implications of the
         adaptation and use of a research tool for pedagogical purposes. One of these
         implications is undoubtedly how the lockdown forced academics and teachers to
         repurpose existing tools developed for different purposesends, such as Textual
         Communities, with the aim of easily switching from in-person to remote if and
         when required. The students would have the opportunity to work from home or
         anywhere else while continuing to receive constant feedback on their work from
         the instructors. But another in the implications of allowing students access to
         research tools — and allowing them some of the flexibility we enjoy as
         researchers ourselves — as a form of critical pedagogy.
         
         10
         In the wake of COVID, a considerable amount of related literature has emerged on
         implementing digital technology in higher educational contexts (Akbar, 2016;
         Lai, 2011), focusing on two main aspects of remote teaching and learning. The
         extensive body of literature on this matter has centeredAkbar, 2016; Lai, 2011).
         These studies centred around the consequences of the pandemic on teaching and
         learning at different levels, highlighting the drawbacks and opportunities of
         remote teaching and learning in this context (Murphy, 2020; Hofer et al., 2021)
         and at the same time theorizing(e.g. Murphy, 2020; Hofer, Nistor, and
         Scheibenzuber, 2021); they also theorized ways in which to normalize e-Learning
         Pedagogies for the near future (Barrett-Fox et al. 2020; Badilla Quintana et
         al., 2021). However, scholarship in this field has limited itself to merely
         theorizing the long-term impact of the lockdown experience without proposing a
         third alternative: a concrete example of what a successful (post-pandemic course
         should look like) future (Barrett-Fox et al. 2020; Careaga-Butter et al., 2020).
         In this paper, we propose a third topic: looking at the implications these
         techniques and what implementations, if any, should be in place in case of
         need.
         
         11
         tools have for our understanding of what we ask our students to do. This study
         presents our experiences adapting a research tool (Textual Communities) as to
         become a pedagogical aid in teachingthe paleography classroom. Our work isserves
         as a practical instanceexample of dealing withaddressing the aftermath of the
         pandemic. It provides us with both a sound teaching environment and an effective
         way to transition to online teaching quickly, should the circumstances require
         it. By using tools in this flexible manner, we ensure that our students are
         safeguarded ifshould extreme circumstances arise, whether personal or pertain
         toaffecting the wholeentire community. We share this experience as a
         generalizable example and a reproducible strategy for teaching paleography and
         the history of handwriting. 
         
         12
         Moreover, the current work presents different perspectives (those of the
         instructors’instructors, the teaching assistant’sassistants, and the
         students’students) and experiences to assess the importance of this course,
         considering its significance afterin the post-COVID-19 era. The paper presents
         an overview of the existing scholarship on emergency e-learning, provided along
         with the most recent developments of the discourse surrounding digital pedagogy
         and specifically its particular inflection, i.e., critical digital pedagogy (Kim,
         2018;
         Stommel, Friend, and Morris, 2020a), whose principles have served as a
         methodology for this work. 
         
         
         
         
         TeachingMethods of teaching paleography without
         computers
         
         13
         InPaleography is the study of historical handwriting, traditionally focused on
         the medieval period. At institutions with strong material resources,
         includingsuch as a Rare Books Libraryrare books library with manuscript
         collections, paleographythis class can be taught in conjunction with other
         aspects of manuscript culture. In such cases, studentsStudents might be asked to
         identify scripts or read directly from manuscript materials under the direction
         of a professor or teaching assistant. Even in those cases, lectures are
         routinely delivered as part of the courses. Tests might include reading or
         copying from original manuscript materials. The widthbreadth of the
         subjectcourse is attached, to thea degree in such cases, determined by available
         materials. A few privileged institutions have wide-rangingInstitutions with
         extensive collections of manuscripts or that are close enough tolocated near
         repositories with various materials to make it possible to have alarge holdings
         can introduce students to a wide range of scripts, languages, and texts covering
         the desired periods, and codicological forms. 
         
         14
         Newer institutions and institutions with more limited funding might need access
         to or holdings can offer a simulacrum of such a course using the increasingly
         large number of high-quality facsimiles for teaching. In such cases, instructors
         might rely on digital facsimiles or digital images made freely available online
         by the repositories holding the manuscripts.from manuscript libraries and other
         cultural institutions. Access to freely available digital images allows
         forenables a pedagogical model in which the students read from thosethese images
         during class, while the instructor clarifies particularparticularly challenging
         sections. This approach would reflect a triedreflects a practice that has served
         many generations of paleographers well. The disadvantage of this practice is
         that it requiresWhether a university has access to the original artifacts or
         facsimiles, however, smaller classes with very few students in order for all of
         them to have the opportunity to practice and receivetraditionally been a sine
         qua non of successful instruction. While lectures are common in such courses, a
         very important part remains hands-on work with the artifacts or facsimiles
         themselves, including plenty of one-on-one feedback. Moreover, this practice
         puts students under pressure to perform in front of their peers. from the
         instructor.
         
         15
         Our pedagogical practice, adapted for a class of 27 students,Our approach we
         switched the focus from reading aloud to reading and recording. We asked the
         students to transcribe the manuscript pages in class and on their own time and
         to include a very light encoding so the transcription could, in theory, be
         processed by computers. 
         
         16
         The class’sThis encoding component is an innovation in reference to more
         traditional approaches to paleography. It allowsThis approach enables students
         to understandengage with texts as dynamic semiotic systems and , recognizing
         transcription not as a mere substitution but as an act of translation —from the
         semiotic system of the manuscript to thethat of the digital transcription
         (Robinson and Solopova, 1993). As Robinson and Solopova (1993) emphasize,
         transcriptions are inherently interpretative and incomplete, akin to all
         translational acts, as they navigate between distinct semiotic system of the
         transcription.frameworks (e.g., the primary source and the digital medium).
         Moreover, in the context of the semiotic shift, the students often begininitiate
         their own reflexive process as to whatregarding why and
         how texts should be interpreted and
         transcribed. 
         
         
         
         
         Institutional
         context
         
         17
         In 2023, Barbara Bordalejo had a class on paleography of the British Isles
         approved in the departments of English and History at the University of
         Lethbridge with manuscript selections covering texts in Latin, Old
         English,French, Old and Middle English produced between 700 and 1500. Although
         her paleographic training in the late 90s1990s included some access to digital
         photography (which was of very low quality at the time), she primarily worked
         with analog materials (, including printed photographs, photocopies, and a few
         manuscripts).. However, after joining the Canterbury Tales Project, Bordalejo
         shifted her paleography work to the computer environments, where she worked with
         digital images taken from old microfilm and transcribed texts encoded in SGML
         using a custom font called “Canterbury.” The new course's design builds on and
         integrates these text encoding skills, which are useful for text processing
         using computers, and commonly implemented in digital humanities. 
         
         18
         The University of Lethbridge is a comprehensive academic research university
         (CARU) with a liberal arts institutionfocus that serves a primarily serving
         undergraduate studentsstudent body. As such, unlike major research larger
         institutions, the university libraryUniversity of Lethbridge has a limited
         collection of original materials that might be used for teaching a general
         paleography class. Historically, the English Department was well-staffed, but
         budgeting constraints weakened the widthbreadth of the program., reducing its
         faculty complement by as much as 50%. Bordalejo arrived in the Fall of 2021 to
         teach medieval literature, digital humanities, and humanities data courses. She
         proposed three courses that were approved as new offerings: Digital Textuality
         (English), Humanities Data (Interdisciplinary), and Paleography (English and
         History). Paleography is offered as a third-year course in both English and
         History. There arewere no exclusionary prerequisites, but knowledge of Old or
         Middle English or History of the Book is advantageouswas recommended for those
         taking the class. The official course syllabus lists(see Bordalejo, 2024) listed
         the following objectives: 
         
         19
         1. identify different scripts,
         
         20
         2. use correct terminology while referring to different scripts,
         
         21
         3. understand the historical context of the studied works,
         
         22
         4. read and transcribe scripts of the British Isles,
         
         23
         5. formulate research questions regarding paleographic studies.
         
         24
         Most students havehad already taken a course focused on medieval history or
         medieval literature. About half of the class had training in either Old English,
         Middle English, or the history of the English language. However, there were also
         students without any knowledge of the subjects listed above.these or similar
         subjects, including a few from the natural sciences who had very little
         background in the humanities at all. A common characteristic the vast majority
         of the students shared was their lack of familiarity with aspects of technology
         such as encoding. Although we are unable to document this, the sense among the
         more experienced members of our team is that, at the turn of the century, it was
         more common for individuals to have at least some knowledge of HTML acquired
         through practices such as blogging and developing websites in the days before
         WYSIWYG (What You See Is What You Get) web applications and the rise of social
         media. While there has been an increase in the access of technology in students’
         day-to-day lives this does not necessarily mean there has been a corresponding
         increase in their understanding of what goes on on the back-end: 
         
         25
         While many young people use technology daily, this does not necessarily mean that
         they possess high-order technical skills that will allow them to excel beyond
         their superficial use of tech gadgets. (Thomas and Blackwood, 2010, p. 8) 
         
         26
         In fact, while programming languages, such as HTML, remain popular among users —
         as illustrated in a recent survey by Stack Overflow (2024) — this does not
         represent a general literacy, as we discovered when we asked students to
         practice making a small webpage to help them understand on a base level how
         information must be structured in order to allow the machine to process it.
         Amongst both offerings of the course we found that students struggled to grasp
         the fundamental logic of computer languages even before attempting to encode the
         manuscripts.
         
         
         
         
         Literature
         review
         
         27
         The emergence of academic literature on the pandemic’s effectimpact on pedagogy
         has resulted inled to two contradictory attitudes. One approach focuses more on
         the short-term implications and views classroom adjustments as a temporary
         response to the pandemic. At the same time, theThe other is geared towards
         predicting the potential long-term impact on pedagogy by continuing to implement
         the new strategies developed during the pandemic. Specifically, onOn the one
         hand, the first attitude highlights the “risks” associated with an increased
         dependency and deployment of digital tools and online learning in an educational
         setting; on the other hand, the second attitude suggests that teaching practices
         should be informed by the COVID experience to enhance them in the future rather
         than discarding them once the pandemic is “over.”
         
         28
         Murphy’s work is situated within the first approach. They focusMurphy focuses on
         the consequences of what they defineis defined as “emergency eLearning” (Murphy,
         2020, p. 1)(2020, p. 1), criticizing the fact that the pandemic has led to a
         general “securitization” of higher education’s rising reliance on surveillance
         technologies and the adoption of one-size-fits-all solutions. They also
         emphasize the “danger of normalizing emergency eLearning” without falling into
         the rhetoric of “condemning all forms of online learning”, but still argue for
         an “emancipation” from the securitization associated with eLearning (Murphy,
         2020, p.(Murphy, 2020, p. 10). In this sense, Murphy is one of the most critical
         voices in the scholarly discussion on the pandemic turn. Still, they focus
         mainly on the risks — neglecting to address other issues, such as the degree to
         which technology is helpful in post-pandemic pedagogies and the circumstances
         from which these changes have come to be.
         
         29
         Hofer, Nistor, and Scheibenzuber have discussed the need to re-examine the
         pandemic experience in terms of its benefits to teaching practices. Consistent
         with the second stance discussed previously — looking at the lessons learned
         from the pandemic as a positive — they engage with the emergency aspects taken
         for granted by Murphy (Hofer et al., 2021).(Hofer et al., 2021). In their
         contribution, the authors startbegin with the idea that normally transformative
         processes may not develop in a gradual, cumulative way likemanner, such as the
         implementation of digital tools in teaching (HoferHofer et al., 2021, p. 2).
         They argue that changes “can be suddenly triggered by unexpected and compelling
         incidents or accidents that make up crisis situations,” such as in the case of
         the pandemic (Hofer et al.Hofer et al. 2021, p. 2). According to their view,
         this happens mainly because “[c]risis situations emphasize the strengths,
         uncover the weaknesses, and lead to progress” (Hofer, Nistor, and Scheibenzuber
         2021, p.Hofer et al. 2021, p. 2). 
         
         30
         In the same vein, Barrett-Fox et al. (Barrett-Fox et al. 2020)In the same vein,
         Barrett-Fox et al. (Barrett-Fox et al., 2020) positively assess this “shift for
         teaching” in terms of the acceleration of “the use of digital technology”,”
         whose potential may be regarded as important “for online learning to bring about
         new pedagogical approaches” (Barrett-Fox et al., 2020Barrett-Fox et al., 2020,
         p. 154) in the post-pandemic. Barrett-Fox et al. stressemphasize the importance
         of movingtransitioning from a “restoration” to an all-embracingencompassing
         “transformation” of teaching practices. This awareness of new approaches and
         methods to engaging students comes from the realization that during the
         lockdown, “it became painfully obvious that we could not just do the same thing.
         Some assignments were no longer possible. Some expectations were no longer
         reasonable. Some objectives were no longer valuable” (Barrett-Fox et al.,
         2020Barrett-Fox et al., 2020, pp. 161–162). Thus, they not only discuss the
         potential benefits of online learning to foster new pedagogical approaches
         (Barrett-Fox et al., 2020, pp. 183–184),Barrett-Fox et al., 2020, pp. 183–184)
         but also how such a shift allows increased access to educational resources and
         opportunities for students to engage in deeper learning. At the same time, they
         highlight potential drawbacks, such as the potential forrisk that digital
         technology tomay exacerbate existing inequalities and the need for teachers to
         acquire new digital skills (Barrett-Fox et al., 2020Barrett-Fox et al., 2020,
         pp. 185–186). Their contribution joins those who call for further research into
         the implications of the pandemic and foresee a positive outcome from the wider
         adoption of online learning and new pedagogies connected to it. 
         
         31
         Moving away from these two earlier defined attitudes,For their part, Lohr et al.
         carried out qualitative research was carried out to “address the lack of
         systematic research on digitally supported learning activities and the
         institutional and personal factors associated with their occurrence in higher
         education” (Lohr et al., 2021, p. 2). The(2021, p. 2). Their broader aim was to
         assess the degree of familiarity of teachers with technology in higher
         educational environments, and this allowed the identification of three distinct
         teacher roles: “powerpointers,” “clickers,” and “digital pros” — each of which
         was shown to be more or less comfortable in the use of digital technologies for
         teaching purposes. This differentiation also suggests that implementation is not
         a one-to-one relation and does not necessarily lead to digital pedagogy, even
         when there is space for digital pedagogical innovation.
         
         32
         This idea is not new and has been analyzed by Badilla Quintana, Careaga-Butter,
         and Fuentes-Henríquez (Badilla Quintana et al., 2021), whoCareaga-Butter et al.
         (2020) considered thatthe degree to which digital tools and resources that
         beneficially contributed to online education during the pandemic can continue in
         the post-pandemic future as well. This is possible only if teachers are willing
         to adopt and integrate them into their teaching practicepractices and are
         prepared to offer students the guidance and support necessary to ensure that
         they can succeedtheir success in their studies. Together with the need “to
         collaborate in the construction of [...] a new mixed educational paradigm that
         can face the post-pandemic context and meet the new demands and requirements of
         the 21st century,” a good-faith effort to integrate digital technologies into
         the classroom is the only way to achieve a “true online education” in the terms
         defined by Badilla Quintana, Careaga-Butter, and Fuentes-Henríquez (Badilla
         Quintana et al., 2021, p.they define (Careaga-Butter et al., 2020, p. 29).
         
         33
         COVID-19 was not the sole prompt for using digital tools to teach and learn. For
         instance, Torsello, Ackerley, and Castello (Torsello et al., 2008Torsello,
         Ackerley, and Castello (Torsello et al., 2008) and Forti (Forti, 2023)Forti
         (Forti, 2023) have already proved the usefulness of integrating corpus
         management programs designed for linguistic analysis into teaching linguistics
         and translation. Social media platforms such as X (formerly known as Twitter)
         have also proven to be beneficial both for teaching and learning purposes
         (Gleason and Manca, 2020; Rinaldo et al., 2011).(Gleason and Manca, 2020;
         Rinaldo et al., 2011). Notably, the cases mentioned above are the only few
         examples we found where advanced tools not primarily intended for pedagogical
         purposes have been repurposed for educational use. Addressing this gap presents
         an opportunity to expand the array of available resources for educators,
         potentially enhancing the quality of the teaching and learning process. We
         addressed this gap through; in our case, it involved the unconventional
         implementation of Textual Communities in the university classroom
         environment.
         
         
         
         
         What is Textual
         Communities?
         
         34
         Textual Communities is an online application designed for the needs of textual
         scholars working with texts, mainly found in manuscripts, in multiple versions.
         It was first established as a project at the University of Saskatchewan with
         funding from the Canadian Foundation for Innovation (CFI) and support from the U
         of S’s Digital Research Centre. Its purpose, as described by Robinson, Nelson,
         and Klaassen is to “provide the infrastructure and tools to allow anyone,
         anywhere interested in a text to contribute to its study, and thus to become
         part of a community working together” (2012). As such, it integrates tools for
         the transcription, collation, regularization, and publication of scholarly
         editions. Because using a social-network-like model. Since Textual Communities
         is available online, the system has been ideal for large collaborative projects
         where participants work asynchronously and might not be physically close.
         Textual Communities(potentially) at a physical distance. It has a component that
         provides version control by recording the source, time, and responsibility for
         changes. Unlike — although, unlike Google Docs, Textual Communities is not
         optimized to allow real-time simultaneous editing of a single document. (making
         it more similar to GitHub). Instead, the system keeps track of different
         versions of transcriptions and records times, duration, and responsibility. In
         addition, the data created within the communities is made available for
         “unrestricted commercial as well as non-commercial use” (Robinson, Nelson, and
         Klaassen, 2012). 
         
         35
         What sets Textual Communities apart are two features: its integrated participant-
         and document-management systems, and its mapping of the fundamental structure
         connecting documents and texts. These reflect two core principles: that
         assembling large corpora is best achieved through well-managed communities of
         contributors, both academic and non-academic; and that the usefulness of the
         corpus depends on clearly articulating the relationships between materials.
         Textual Communities is designed to organize multiple participants around shared
         editorial projects. It supports relational structures ranging from tightly
         controlled editorial teams to loosely organized crowdsourced communities —
         making it ideal for both classroom use and long-term research. The name “Textual
         Communities” therefore highlights the importance of community aspects in textual
         editing and scholarship, which is one reason why the system is easily adaptable
         for classroom environments. Since the system’s inception in the 2010s, various
         projects have welcomed collaborators from around the globe. For long-term
         enterprises like the Canterbury Tales Project, more than one hundred and twenty
         participants have joined Textual Communities since the implementation of its
         latest version in 2014. These collaborators are mostly transcribers who have
         been trained in TEI-XML as well as in paleography and Middle English. The system
         has been tested, and up to forty participants have been logged into a single
         project simultaneously, but there is no reason to believe that higher numbers
         would not work either. 
         
         
         
         
         How did we adapt Textual Communities to the
         classroom?
         
         36
         Although the goal of a paleography course, traditionally and primarily, has been
         to train students in the interpretation of hand-written documents, there has
         always been an element of research apprenticeship involved. Medieval and
         literary manuscripts are not objects most individuals encounter outside of a
         research context (i.e., by requesting access for research purposes from academic
         libraries, museums, and private collectors), and the conventions used to track
         student observations — such as the Leiden transcription conventions — are those
         used by researchers (e.g. Wilcken, 1932). 
         
         37
         Today, digital transcription is the standard for projects interested in text
         comparison and analysis, whether their outputs are released in print or
         digitally. Although the study of paleography requires reading handwritten
         materials and identifying scripts and scribes, paleographers increasingly find
         themselves working within digital environments that need their own subset of
         specialized knowledge. Our In adapting Textual Communities to the paleography
         course, therefore, requiresclassroom, we continue this tradition. At the same
         time, the more complex needs of a very light introduction to digital environment
         — which require coding consistency and controlled markup — necessitated that we
         also teach our students some basic information about computer markup and
         encoding systems, with particular emphasis on TEI-XML as the standard used for
         digital projects. These classes were led by Daniel Paul O’Donnell, a former
         Chair of the TEI consortium. Beyond this basic computational instruction, a
         series of additional decisions were required in order to implement Textual
         Communities — which was not designed as a pedagogical tool — into the classroom.
         
         
         
         
         
         How did we adapt Textual Communities to the
         classroom?
         
         38
         Because Textual Communities was not designed with pedagogical goals in mind, a
         series of decisions were required to use it successfully in the classroom. For
         this particular class, for example, the transcriptions did not need to be
         further processed or published, and their long-term availability was not
         required. For these reasons, wepreservation was not required (indeed privacy
         regulations at the University require records of student work to be destroyed at
         set deadlines after the end of a class unless additional permissions have been
         granted). We thought, therefore, that Textual Communities Sandbox offered an
         appropriate environment for the students’ work (indeed, this is the version we
         recommend for anyone testing the software or working on short-term
         mini-projects). The Textual Communities SandboxThis has most of the same
         functionalities as the production version. It offers: there are no limitations
         inon creating communities by any interested parties, but it does not provide
         archiving and publication facilities. Although it would have been possible to
         use the production version with the same effect, we chose to create the course
         within the experimental space. After all, the primary purpose of its use was
         beyond the regular implementations of Textual Communities, but still required a
         centralized system that would keep track of work being done and completed by
         students, as well as keeping track of the hours worked and every change
         implemented in the texts. Because of its versioning capabilities, Textual
         Communities allowed us to track in real-time the work being done by the students
         either in the classroom or outside of it. , either in the classroom or outside
         of it. As of March 2025, the sandbox environment referenced in this study has
         been retired. All functionality described in this article is now available
         through the platform formerly known as the Textual Communities
         Production version. The primary site is https://textualcommunities.com; the
         address https://textualcommunities.org
         now redirects to this site.
         
         
         
         
         Class
         structure
         
         39
         Lessons were structured in three-hour blocks, with a short break. The first part
         of each lesson iswas dedicated to the history of a particular script, its
         characteristic features, and the changes in writing technologies during that
         period. The course beginsbegan with Old English manuscripts but includesalso
         included Latin, Old French, Old and Middle English texts. To accommodate every
         one of the scriptseach script, we discussdiscussed the evolution and use of
         specific characters in different periodseach period, as well as contemporary
         abbreviations and their meanings. Generally, theeach lecture concludesconcluded
         by showing particularities present in thesample pages towhich students would
         then transcribe as well as, including ambiguous signs, as well as and
         extra-textual features (damage to the manuscript, scribal corrections, etc.)
         that might cause difficulty. 
         
         40
         The rest of the class was dedicated to practical transcription, during which time
         each student worked on their individual transcriptions. The setup of Textual
         Communities focuses on understanding the text as an instance of a work preserved
         in individual folia within a manuscript (Work/Manuscript/Folio; see Figure 1),
         but this is not practical when one expects students to work mostly independently
         of each other.
         
         41
         Figure 1: Textual Communities screen capture showing
         the ontological structure “work/manuscript/folio.”
         
         42
         In production environments, the point of collaboration within textual
         communitiesTextual Communities is that different participants work on different
         manuscript passages or, if they work on the same, that they work on different
         parts of the workflow (e.g., transcribing, checking, etc.)..; see figure 2). It
         is also assumed, in most cases, that contributors will use their own technology
         (i.e., computers, operating systems, etc.), albeit with minimal technological
         requirements. In a classroom environment, however, neither of these assumptions
         is true. In the first place, accommodation and equity concerns mean that the
         system must be adapted so that students can both use their own technology or
         make use of university-provided equipment. In the secondFirst, the students are
         all learning the same skills from the same manuscripts, meaning that the
         community works in parallel rather than serial in a production environment.
         Second, accommodation and equity concerns necessitate that the system be adapted
         to allow students to use their own technology or utilize university-provided
         equipment. 
         
         43
         Figure 2: Illustration of the different workflows for
         production (where multiple people work on different parts of a document) and
         classroom (where each student transcribes and is evaluated on the same parts of
         the same document)
         
         44
         Our classes were scheduled in a lab equipped with Apple computers to ensure that
         students had access to sufficient computer power, regardless of their personal
         means. But in many cases — (indeed most —) students preferred to work on their
         laptops or tablets (— in some cases, using special adaptations required for
         various accommodations).. Before the beginning of the semester, we registered
         individual students with Textual Communities and added them to a community
         called “Paleography 2023Paleography2023.” This allowed us to upload manuscript
         images from various sources and place them in separate folders, each
         corresponding to a particular student. The images were selected to correspond
         with the topics and chronology being followed in class (a list of the texts used
         for our lessons can be found in Bordalejo, 2024). 
         
         45
         For the course, we set up a community called “Paleography2023.” Instead of
         separating the pages according to manuscripts as would have been done in a
         production environment, we created individual folders for each student and
         populated them with images of the different manuscript pages assigned to the
         class (see Figure 2 and Figure 3Figures 3 and 4, and cf. Figures 1 and 2). 
         
         46
         Figure 23: Textual Communities screen capture showing
         the modified structure, “course/person.”
         
         47
         During the practical portion of the class, we walked around the classroom, making
         sureensuring that the students could make sense of the text and answer
         questions. Frequently, questions leadled to conversations about interpretation
         and misinterpretation, opinions, and more advanced discussions about the
         implications of different transcription choices. Students often shared their
         perspectives on the text and its interpretation collaboratively. Each student
         was working on the assigned pages for the day, but was encouraged to work at
         their own pace. Although, as an instructor, one might prefer to keep students
         working at a similar pace, one of the significant advantages of working within
         Textual Communities is that students can take ownership of their time and choose
         when and how to work. This is particularly noticeable towards the end of the
         semester, as students have gained confidence and are less hesitant to make their
         own decisions. 
         
         48
         Figure 34: Textual Communities screen capture showing
         the modified structure, “course/person/folio.”
         
         49
         If particular manuscripts turned out to be
         challenging, the class swapped completed transcriptions for peer correction as
         the class as a whole read the text together. A few students wanted to pair up
         outside of class for peer correction, and although they could have done. If this
         just by swapping log-in credentials, they were already familiar enough withwas
         requested, the system to realize that by being assigned toprofessor or teaching
         assistants could assign their peers’ transcriptions to them for review within
         Textual Communities, there would be a. A record of the changes made to the
         student’s original transcription would be visible, as Textual Communities has a
         version control system that allows users to revert to previous versions so that
         changes made are visible.
         
         
         
         
         Checking student
         work
         
         50
         Although it might appear that a system allowing
         the transcription of primary sources would present a systembe intrinsically
         geared to paleography teachingclass, there are no mechanisms within Textual
         Communities to evaluate the accuracy of the transcription of individual
         characters. This required that checking and evaluation be done independently of
         the system by the instructor(s) and teaching assistant(s). 
         
         51
         From an instructor’s perspective, the biggest drawback of Textual Communities is
         that it does not have a feature to correct the submitted transcriptions
         automatically. Although we do not discarddismiss the ideadesirability for
         pedagogical purposes of the implementation ofimplementing a correction module
         within Textual Communitiesthe system, this is not a requirement for classroom
         use, as correcting individual transcriptions is not a particularly onerous task.
         In the endUltimately, we usedemployed three methods of correction: instructor-
         correction, peer- correction, and self-correction. After all students had
         submitted a particular transcriptiontheir transcriptions, the instructor read
         the manuscriptmanuscripts aloud. This allowsenabled students to self-assess,
         correct their work, and discuss differentexplore various transcription options.
         We also tried transcription exchange, during which students gave each other
         access to transcriptions to evaluate each other’s accuracy. 
         
         52
         During the semester, as students became more proficient, they were encouraged to
         revise their transcriptions to make themensure they were as accurate as
         possible. At the same time, they were given different choices: to retain all
         abbreviations, to expand them, or to use encoding to reflect both states. We
         discussed the advantages and disadvantages of each approach and why they might
         want to selectchoose one rather thanover the other. These techniques not only
         maintain students’ engagement but also offer an opportunity to test acquired
         skills in self-guided work. We recognizeacknowledge that we follow in the
         footsteps of the proponents of Critical Digital Pedagogy (, as will be discussed
         below).. So we aim to emphasize students' roleroles in their educational
         journey. In this light, we work towardsstrive to foster students’ independent
         thinking and self-determined work. 
         
         53
         Although the initial aim of implementing Textual Communities was to ensure that
         the class could easily continue online if required, we soon realized its
         enormous potential to exercise student self-regulation, independence, and
         confidence-building. The practical format of the class, togethercombined with
         supervised independent work, was well received asbecause it differed from most
         classes in our department, most of which centertypically focus on analysis and
         close reading. 
         
         
         
         
         Teaching
         assistant’s perspective 
         
         54
         To support the instructor in the process of providing constructive feedback and
         help students improve their skills, the role of the teaching assistant (TA)s’
         role in this novel class set-up is of great importance. First of all, TAs have
         to be aware of the course'scourse design and ideally contribute to it by working
         alongside the instructor. This collaboration can yield many benefits not only to
         their overall professional development as prospective educators but also to
         enhance course delivery. Being liminal figures between students and instructors,
         they can leverage a privileged observation point, which enables TAs to provide
         insights from both perspectives –— the instructor’s and the students’.students.’
         TAs must actively participate in class activities, almost as if they were
         enrolled students, to assess progress and identify issues effectively. This
         involves transcribing texts before the start of each class, which allows the TAs
         to understand the challenges posed by each transcription. Since each scribe’s
         work is unique, being familiar with potential problems in a text enhances their
         ability to respond quickly and effectively. This proactive approach ensures that
         TAs are well-prepared to support students and address any difficulties during
         the course. While the TAs’ presence enriches the learning experience for both
         students and the TAs themselves, it is essential to avoid the drawback of
         students becoming overly dependent on them.
         
         55
         Another of the domains where TAs can prove very beneficial to the course is the
         evaluation of the difficulty of each task as well as the weekly workload. As the
         course progresses, the TA importance does not diminish but instead changes
         according to different factors. When the students begin the course, their
         unfamiliarity with both the tools (XML-TEI encoding and the peculiarities of the
         Textual Communities Sandbox, above all) and the scripts (insular minuscule,
         caroline, gothic, etc.) makes the TAs fundamental to letin providing the
         students receive moreearly personalized and timely feedback, which that is
         essential for the development of these skills. The students may also struggle
         with the discontinuities that characterize each period. For instance, once the
         students are well acquainted with the variations of the gothica textualis hand they
         will then have to readjust themselves to
         the knowledge of a fairly distinct hand such as the anglicana. This struggle, together
         with the fatigue of the semester,
         usually referred to as “exhaustion” or “burnout” in the literature (Galbraith
         and Merrill, 2012; Law, 20162007), often requires diversified types of
         additional support to students, especially considering their different learning
         styles and eventual needs.
         
         56
         This means that generally, TAs serve as mentors for students. Having been
         involved in transcription projects and having first-hand experience of the
         issues the students may encounter, they provide hands-on guidance, troubleshoot
         technical problems, and encourage students to explore the tools autonomously.
         This last part is fundamental since the pedagogical significance of a TArole
         should always be that of offering ongoing support while avoiding the risk of
         creating a situation for which the students solely depend on the TA. In line
         with the self-centred learning strategy adopted by the course, TAs should
         focusfocused on empowering students to develop their problem-solving skills and
         independence rather than providing solutions too readily. This balance
         ensuresensured that students benefitbenefited from the support of TAs without
         compromising their learning and growth, considering that student’sstudents’
         learning autonomy should always be at the core of their activities, helping
         students develop self-confidence and the necessary skills to navigate the
         challenges of digital transcriptions autonomously. This relates to fundamental
         metacognitive skills –— the awareness of one’s own learning processes–: TAs must
         let students develop these skills in their own ways. For example, they are
         bridging the gap between theoretical knowledge of a handwriting’s
         characteristics and the practical application of that knowledge to understand
         the idiosyncrasies of a given manuscript via the student’s own transcription
         decisions.
         
         57
         Another challenge is managing the feedback.
         Correcting transcriptions –even in small classes– is a labour-intensive activity
         and reflects the shortcomings of Textual Communities, which has not been
         conceived to meet the demands of a classroom. To address this issue, an
         interface of automated grading tools to assess transcriptions and give immediate
         feedback would have to be integrated into the platform. This would greatly
         alleviate the workload of the instructors and the TAs, tracking students'
         progress and streamlining the submission of assignments, which is currently
         carried out with hand-and-eye methods. Every transcription has to be checked and
         then recorded on a spreadsheet by hand according to a formula counting the
         transcriptions for each of the 12 modules. These values are then converted to a
         percentage and a corresponding letter grade, weighted into the final average
         according to the syllabus. If, instead, this workload could be lightened by
         implementing this process into Textual Communities and perhaps making it
         interoperable with the API system of the academic Moodle. 
         
         
         
         
         StudentStudent’s Perspective
         
         58
         In both instances of the course offered (in Spring 2023 and 2024), the
         introductory class was centred around explaining what transcription is and
         theits different types of transcription.(diplomatic, etc.). Textual Communities
         was not introduced to students immediately. Instead, they were presented with an
         image of a page of “Alice’s Adventures Under Ground” handwritten byin
         Wonderland” in Lewis CarrollCarroll’s handwriting, with the text meandering and
         curving across the page. They were asked to transcribe the page onto a paper by
         hand. This was an initial challenge to see what students perceived as being
         essential aspects of transcribing. Would they keep the shape of the words on the
         page? Would they copy the page numbers on the original image's corners? Would
         they include the virgules and dashes used? This practice allowedenabled students
         to understand how transcribing is an act of interpretation carried out with
         regard to a larger purpose and how many differentmultiple transcriptions
         couldcan exist for onea single text. Indeed we use this method in teaching other
         computational skills to students at the University of Lethbridge: by beginning
         with an illustration of the problem a system (such as TEI markup) is is intended
         to address (such as recording an interpretation of a document) and then asking
         students to come with their own approach before teaching them about existing
         methods. We believe that this allows students to understand the canonical
         systems better by illustrating the problem they were developed to address. 
         
         59
         With thisthe problem in mind, students were then introduced to the Textual
         Communities platform. While the instructor and TAs initially guided the students
         on how to use the website's basic features — how to access their assigned pages,
         save their work, etc. — the students were left to decide how their
         transcriptions would look. They had to decide what they wanted to include in
         their work. If, forFor example, if a line was crossed out and something new text
         was written above the deleted text, they had to decide if they wantedwhether to
         include both parts, one or the other, or indicate the deleted text, etc. Student
         transcriptions would often differdiffered significantly from one another in
         significant ways due to thesethe decisions that had to be made throughout their
         work. The instructor and TAs emphasized that making different choices about what
         to include or not include was not necessarily right or wrong; it was just a
         matter of interpretation. Perhaps the best statement about the student
         perspective in our course comes from one of our students herself, Victoria
         Simmons, quoted here with permission:
         
         60
         As the Rural Diary Archive [a project the student was looking at] suggests,
         crowdsourcing of transcription can be accomplished not only on a global or
         national scale but also on a smaller, local scale by using a classroom setting.
         A similar type of collaborative experience was created in our classroom when we
         focused on discussing certain parts of manuscripts that were comparatively
         complex to transcribe. When there was a particular section of our assigned
         manuscript that was more difficult –— due to multiple adjacent characters
         written in minimum for example –— the class would be encouraged to individually
         express to the class how they had interpreted the characters when they were
         transcribing. In most circumstances, this resulted in many unique
         interpretations expressed by classmates as to how they visually followed the
         connection of ligatures into what they believed may have been the scribe’s
         intended characters. By listening to multiple people voice their reasoning
         behind transcribing the writing in the way that they had chosen, the entire
         class was invited to look at a variety of possible interpretations for each
         transcription. The most important result of this experience is that each
         individual is challenged to question their own method of transcription. This
         technique is beneficial to the field of paleography because it prevents
         transcribers from settling on a single, definitive – and potentially incorrect
         or incomplete — perspective of the transcription. The benefit of this experience
         is amplified when it comes to global crowdsourcing projects, such as those
         mentioned above, which allow both beginners and experts to provide a greater
         variety of original viewpoint. (Simmons, student paper, 2023)
         
         61
         As Simmons notes, “many unique interpretations [were] expressed by classmates …
         By listening to multiple people voice their reasoning behind transcribing the
         writing in the way that they had chosen, the entire class was invited to look at
         various possible interpretations for each transcription. The most important
         result of this experience is that each individual is challenged to question
         their own method of transcription” (Simmons, student paper, 2023). Viewing other
         students’ pages and their work on Textual Communities also allowed those who
         were not present in class to have still be a part of this experience of seeing
         other people’s interpretations of the text. 
         
         62
         Students were also encouraged to work together on transcriptions and to
         frequently ask questions as the instructor and TAs were in the room for the
         working period. As described by one studentSimmons, a “collaborative experience
         was created in our classroom” (Simmons, student paper, 2023). This, combined
         with the previously established attitude of transcription as interpretation,
         established that the classwork was not focused on being “right” or “wrong.”
         Instead, the priority was to learn important characteristics and traits of the
         various hands taught and try their best to complete the assigned pages given.
         Some students initially seemed apprehensive about the lack of a “grade” they
         would receive for their transcriptions. As a result, many of the early
         transcriptions took students a long time to complete. To easealleviate this
         worryconcern, the beginning of later classes was devoted to looking
         atidentifying common errors among multiple students. In both course iterations
         (Spring 2023 and Spring 2024), the instructor and TAs adjusted the amount of
         correcting done to transcriptions depending on how much the students requested
         feedback for their work. Textual Communities allows those categorized asenables
         instructors categorized on the platform to access student pages and edit or add
         comments to their transcriptions so that, allowing students can accessto view
         comments about their work outside of class time. 
         
         63
         Accessing Textual Communities outside of class time from any computer is one of
         the significant benefits of the platform, allowing students to work outside of
         the set class-time working periods. They could sign in to their Textual
         Communities account from any computer. This, combined with the rule in the
         course that the pages only had to be done by the end of the semester, allowed
         students the flexibility and freedom to complete coursework at their own pace.
         This student-centred approach was enabled by the flexibility offered by the
         Textual Communities platform. 
         
         64
         The collaborative and accessible platform of Textual Communities allowed students
         to work together with classmates and consider the many possible interpretations
         that transcription might involve. It also allowed students to access their work
         and view corrections or comments made about it on their own time, which might
         contribute to easing students’ worries about periods in the semester that
         required more of their attention — they could work on their pages at any point,
         as long as all of them were completed by the end of the semester. In short,
         using Textual Communities as a platform encouraged students to collaborate,
         consider the interpretative process of transcriptions, not focus too hard on
         mistakes they might have considered themselves to have made, and gave them the
         freedom to work on assigned pages at times that worked best for their
         personalized schedules. 
         
         
         
         
         Discussion
         
         65
         The core innovation in using Textual Communities for teaching is that students
         make their own research decisions about what to transcribe and why, with
         instructors supporting them in implementing these decisions. As O’Donnell et al.
         (2016b) argue, the traditional division between “research” — i.e., what the
         professor engages in and is protected by academic freedom — and “teaching” —
         i.e., when students are told what to do and how to do it — misrepresents the
         nature of Humanities scholarship and limits student learning by preventing
         meaningful engagement in research in a meaningful way. This practice also
         reflects what we call the “First Law of Humanities Computing,” which refers to
         the fact that any application of computation to a humanities problem seems to
         require a fundamental examination of the purposes behind the original activity
         (O’Donnell 2016a). Asking students to consider why they want to transcribe these
         manuscripts, what they hope to achieve by doing so, and how they can match their
         methods to their goals, is a way of asking them to engage in critical reflection
         on their own learning — both within the course itself and, of course, more
         broadly within their programs. Unlike non-digital work, where intuition and
         analogy often can serve as guides, digital work demands conscious design and
         algorithmic thinking. By allowing students to exercise judgment and pursue their
         own questions, Textual Communities collapses this gap. It invites students to
         engage in the same intellectual freedoms that define research itself. 
         
         66
         As we described earlier, this meant that there were numerous active discussions
         on the implications of specific choices during the transcription process. While
         the lecturing and grading resembled more traditional class structure and
         dynamics, which relates to the intrinsic nature of any paleography class, the
         use of Textual Communities provided students with tools and methods —
         high-resolution, digital facsimiles, peer dialogue, collaboration, and
         meaningful input into the methods they used to transcribe (scribal corrections,
         unclear textual segments, a change in scribal “hands,” and letter forms) — that
         allowed them to set their own research questions, exercise their viewpoints and
         interpretations, and pursue them according to their own critical judgments. 
         
         67
         The version control system helps students to track their own variants of the text
         and can reconstruct their train of thought regarding their transcription work
         (for instance, where the student might interpret a mark modification from a
         scribe or ignore it). In contrast to traditional approaches to paleography,
         Textual Communities prompts students to reflect on their actions as they are
         taking place in an even more profound manner. The reason for this is that it
         compels the students to face the logic of the machine and its one-sidedness,
         which forces fixed choices where human interpretation would allow ambiguity,
         requiring students to decide definitively between possibilities that a
         manuscript might leave open. For instance, the XML-TEI markup language allows
         for hundreds of ways to encode features within a single page, with variations
         such as different forms of damage to the page (such as water damage, erasure,
         fire, animal, scraping, etc.). This level of critical engagement with the
         problem — the problem-solving itself — creates a beneficial dialogue, which
         involves all the members, from the experts (teachers and TAs) to the students'
         peers. Some of the students within the classroom already have an intuitive
         understanding of what is going on, and they have an opportunity to share this
         with the class. This peer collaboration throughout the course allows students to
         see how others are interpreting and solving the problems they see on the pages.
         For instance, students were asked to attempt to recognize the material of the
         page on which the text appeared (whether parchment or paper). As a result,
         interpretative uncertainty in the document can be rendered into different
         solutions. One student might interpret a letter form completely differently from
         another — for example, reading pride instead of þrid (a
         variant spelling of “third”) based on the common confusion between thorn and p —
         or assume a sense of intentionality from the scribe regarding what another might
         view as an error. 
         
         68
         In the foreword of the collection Critical Digital
         PedagogyCritical Digital Pedagogy edited by Stommel, Friend, and
         MorrisStommel, Friend, and Morris during the pandemic (Stommel et al.,
         2020a)(Stommel et al., 2020a), Benjamin argues that thissuch experience has also
         workedfunctions as “a portal, a gateway between one world and the next”
         (Benjamin, 2020)2020) leading to a greater integration of digital tools not
         initially developed for teaching purposes in education — as in the case of
         Textual Communities. In the introduction to the same collection, the authors
         also state that “[n]othing in edtech was built for humans. Thus far, our edtech
         machines were taught only to speak to other machines” (Stommel et al.,
         2020b).Stommel et al., 2020b). An example of this is represented by video
         conferencing tools like Zoom that “were not built to meet the moral challenge of
         a present moment like this one” (Stommel et al., 2020b).(Stommel et al., 2020b).
         They have allowed, however, for synchronous collaborative learning experiences
         and virtual classroom discussions without replacing the classroom, which is and
         remains “unique” and distinct from “the architecture of the Web” (Stommel et
         al., 2020b.).(Stommel et al., 2020b). 
         
         69
         This concept of the uniqueness of the classroom, “with all its limitations”
         (hooks, 1994, p. 207)(hooks, 1994, p. 207), makes it “a location of
         possibility,” that allows for both the empowerment of social actors and the
         disruption of traditional forms of teaching. In hooks’ view, education should be
         a space for freedom and ultimately a transformative process. She advocates for
         engaged pedagogy, which understands classrooms as a site for self-guided
         exploration and mutual participation. While she extends this approach beyond a
         traditional academic setting, our practice of using Textual Communities has been
         an attempt to integrate these suggestions meaningfully. 
         
         70
         This relates to the sort of We have kept hooks’ perspective in mind in
         constructing this environment that we have striven to construct for theour
         paleography class. In this sense, oneOne of theour main objectives was to try
         and “responsibilize” students in the way defined dy (Spencer, 2018, p. 291)by
         Spencer (2018, p. 291). For Spencer, renegotiating the “social contract” between
         professor and student within the classroom is one of them. Spencer introduces
         this concept at the outset of the article, highlighting the limited roles each
         party can ethically operate (Spencer 2018,(Spencer, 2018, p. 287). According to
         this contract, the relationship between the professor, responsible for the
         course content and grading criteria, and the student, seeking to acquire skills
         to advance their future career prospects, resembles in its fundamental features
         a customer-provider neoliberal transaction. For Spencer, precisely this
         transactional dynamic is utterly problematic since it creates a power imbalance,
         where the professor supervises, and the student works at the pace dictated by
         the employer, potentially for the professor'sprofessor’s benefit (Spencer, 2018,
         pp. 287–288).
         
         71
         Moreover, this power imbalance makes it difficult for students to raise
         objections, and thus a need to acknowledge and constructively engage with this
         issue for the benefit of both students and professors (Spencer, 2018, pp.
         288–289). Fellmayer (Fellmayer, 2020)Fellmayer (2020) stresses the significance
         of reflexivity in coping with this asymmetry by acknowledging one's privilege
         and agency in benefiting from an inequitable society, which impedes meaningful
         disruption. Therefore, our focal point was to create a transformative
         educational experience for their students through digital tools in the framework
         established in the field of critical digital pedagogy during the pandemic.
         
         72
         Critical digital pedagogy is characterized by a deep engagement with the use of
         tools and technologies. Still, it is configured as a practice that centres on
         questioning and reflecting on these tools and their usage (Stommel et al.,
         2020b)., while encouraging students to question and reflect on those same tools
         and methods (Stommel et al., 2020b). This approach represents an expansion of
         the work of Paulo Freire, a Brazilian educator who criticized educational
         institutions for their tendency to silence or marginalize dissenting voices in
         his seminal work "Pedagogy of the Oppressed" (Freire,
         2000)(Freire, 2000) and was exiled for his views, being deeply committed to
         rethinking education and advocating for more inclusive and equitable learning
         environments. 
         
         73
         Critical digital pedagogy seeks to dismantle impediments to learning. It argues
         that it is especially fruitful to probe the ground and identify the gap between
         theory and practice, but of course, it does not suggest that there are easy
         answers to the challenges of remote learning. While it can be helpful, it must
         be employed thoughtfully to be effective. Stommel, Friend, and Morris state
         that:Stommel, Friend, and Morris state that: 
         
         74
         The word “pedagogy,” as we use it, defines the work of education at the
         intersection of theory and practice — the act of teaching that derives from
         reflection and which inspires reflection again. Pedagogy is both where
         “critical” and “digital” terminate, and also the whole terrain of teaching.
         (Stommel et al., 2020b)(Stommel et al., 2020b)
         
         75
         The triad “critical,” “digital,” and “pedagogical” must be kept without
         privileging “digital” at the expense of “critical” or of “pedagogy.” Suppose one
         only emphasizes the critical aspect of teaching. In that case, there is a risk
         of reducing it to a mere instrument, relegating the task of reflecting on
         teaching to the humanities and separating critical thinking from STEM fields,
         for instance. This narrow approach not only limits the potential impact of
         critical work, but also underestimates the vast array of teaching and learning
         activities that require criticality and a commitment to dismantling
         institutional or societal obstacles to learning (Stommel et al., 2020b)(Stommel
         et al., 2020b). However, the ideal process of dismantling barriers to learning
         has been further complicated by the challenges that have arisen during the
         pandemic period, which have added new layers of complexity to a pre-existing
         multifaceted landscape to let students take ownership of their learning and
         promote freedom in the classroom.
         
         76
         Effecting this is not necessarily easy, as Maha Bali argues in the same
         collection ((Bali, 2020)2020), suggesting it is too easy to focus on theory and
         not enough on praxis. As she claims of her teaching context at the American
         University of Cairo: “[c]ritical pedagogy [...] is not about knowing how to do
         everything right or getting it right the first time, or every time. It is about
         putting faith in our learners to take control of their learning and teach us,
         each other, and themselves in the process” (Bali, 2020).(Bali, 2020).
         Essentially, this learning approach is based on the fact that she does not “make
         everything explicit on the first
         day,” stating the importance of “of learning from each other” and having
         “flexible and negotiable” syllabi, as well as “the importance of dialogue and
         talk about respectful disagreement and the importance of class participation” to
         continuing to “explore the dungeon” in an autonomous manner (Bali, 2020;
         emphasis in the original).
         
         77
         (Bali, 2020; emphasis in the original). Moving by these premises, we think that
         digital technologies are an ideal means to promote student autonomy, as they
         provide a toolkit for students to navigate the learning process independently.
         This idea is further echoed by Cathy N. Davidson’s suggestion to structure a
         "“student-centered class"” that utilizes technology to the extent desired by the
         instructor, which allows the instructor to maintain control while also
         empowering students to take an active role in service of their pedagogical needs
         at the same time fostering a dynamic and rewarding learning environment that is
         flexible and effective (Davidson,
         2020). 
         
         78
         Pete Rorabaugh (Rorabaugh, 2020Pete Rorabaugh (2020) draws from the idea that
         teaching is a moral act with significant implications for educators, including
         the ethical dimension, to argue that a critical approach to pedagogy is
         consistent with the goals of a digitally-infused curriculum because digital
         culture offers new opportunities to achieve that goal. Rorabaugh argues that
         digital tools have the potential to empower students in the digital sphere by
         providing them with new opportunities for human connectivity and enabling them
         to refocus on how power works in the classroom:
         
         79
         Digital tools offer the opportunity to refocus how power works in the classroom.
         In its evolution from passive consumption to critical production — from the cult
         of the expert to a culture of collaboration — the critical and digital classroom
         emerges as a site of intellectual and moral agency. ((Rorabaugh, 2020)
         
         80
         In Rorabaugh’s view, critical digital pedagogies aim to disrupt the conventional
         hierarchical structure of the classroom, allowing students to take charge of
         their learning and play an active role in their education. There is a moral
         obligation to engage learners in a democratic discovery of their own
         empowerment. By utilizing digital tools, students are given the opportunity to
         interact and collaborate with co-learners across various platforms on the
         internet. However, this kind of learning environment requires a critical
         pedagogue who is knowledgeable and skilled in selecting appropriate tools and
         activities and can blend them with an interactive learning community.
         
         81
         For us, the pandemic served as a catalyst for exploring new approaches to
         teaching and learning that prioritize critical thinking,
         student-centerednesscentredness, and the thoughtful use of digital tools.
         Through the practical application of these principles, we have been able to
         create a new kind of classroom environment that is responsive to the
         post-pandemic needs and realities of our students, and that fosters engagement,
         collaboration, and meaningful learning experiences. As we continue to navigate
         the ongoing challenges presented by the pandemic and beyond, these principles
         will continue to guide our work as educators and serve as a foundation for
         innovative and effective pedagogical practices.
         
         
         
         
         Conclusions
         
         
         
         
         Conclusion
         
         82
         The implementation of Textual Communities as an environment to teach paleography
         proved to be advantageous from various perspectives. It is true that, if we were
         inever to face a situation similar to that of March 2020 again, we would be able
         to move into online teaching almost effortlessly. However, using an online
         environment as a teaching resource has other advantages. Mainly, this
         environment enables students to find their own work rhythm.
         
         83
         Because paleography is a skill that improves with practice, it is not uncommon
         for beginners to have a great deal ofexperience significant difficulty and
         advance at what might seem a glacialslow pace. As students practice, they are
         likely to work fastermore efficiently and more accurately. By using Textual
         Communities, our students are able tocan manage their time in a way that is more
         suitable tosuits their personal circumstances. For example, someone might start
         a transcription during the allocated class period but not be able to finish it.
         At home, they can access the system and work at convenient times. Each with each
         change gets recorded in the versioning component. 
         
         84
         As the students became familiar with Textual Communities, they were able to make
         arrangements for collaboration with others and create a system of peer
         evaluation and support to help each other become more accurate and achieve
         better results. Fostering this cooperative spirit resulted inled to the growth
         of the parties involved, not justonly in the study of paleography but also in
         their development as researchers and human beingsindividuals. 
         
         85
         It is certainly the case that the pandemic induced an acceleration in the usage
         of digital technologies in teaching and learning. While their initial adoption
         during the pandemic may have been driven by necessity, the tools’ effectiveness
         in enhancing the learning experience can still be effective in the post-pandemic
         period, as we have demonstrated in our paper. The potential for innovation and
         renovation implicit in many arguments regarding the digital turn during the
         pandemic permeates initiatives such as ours. In seeing the pandemic experience
         as an opportunity to pushencourage educators into creative use of to creatively
         utilize available resources, we turnedtransformed the challenge into an occasion
         for reorganizing the classroom space asinto a hybrid environment. 
         
         86
         The uncertainties inof a post-pandemic world have forcedcompelled us to be more
         imaginative and resourceful, pushingprompting us in ways we might not have
         considered before. We have been reminded that we can adapt successfully and find
         new ways to engage our students with our subject while giving them a sense of
         independence and freedom. 
         
         
         
         
         Acknowledgments 
         
         87
         The authors thank Victoria Simmons for contributing a reflection on
         classroom-based transcription practices, which has been included in this
         article, which helped shape our understanding of the students’ perspective. We
         also thank the referees and editors at DHQ for their thoughtful comments and
         recommendations on an earlier draft of this article.
         
         88
         References
         
         89
         Akbar, M. (2016) ‘Digital technology shaping teaching practices in higher
         education’, Frontiers in ICT 3, 3(February). doi: Akbar,
         M. (2016) ‘Digital technology shaping teaching practices in higher education’,
         Frontiers in ICT 3(1). https://doi.org/10.3389/fict.2016.00001. 
         
         90
         Badilla Q., Graciela, M., Careaga-Butter, M., and Fuentes-Henríquez, C. (2021)
         ‘Critical and prospective analysis of online education in pandemic and
         post-pandemic contexts’, Aloma: Revista de Psicologia,
         Ciències de l’Educació i de l’Esport, 38(2), pp. 23–32. doi: https://doi.org/10.51698/aloma.2020.38.2.23-32.
         
         
         91
         Bali, M. (2020) ‘Critical pedagogy: Intentions and realities’, in Stommel, J.
         Friend, C. and Morris, S. M. (eds.) Critical digital pedagogy:
         A collection. Hybrid Pedagogy Inc. . 
         
         92
         Bali, M. (2020) ‘Critical pedagogy: Intentions and realities’, in Stommel, J.,
         Friend, C., and Morris, S. M. (eds.) Critical digital
         pedagogy: A collection. Hybrid Pedagogy Inc. Available at: https://pressbooks.pub/cdpcollection/chapter/critical-pedagogy-intentions-and-realities/
         (Accessed: 16 October 2024). 
         
         93
         Barrett-Fox, R., Bayne, B., Cooper, V., and Espinosa, G. (2020) ‘How the
         Coronavirus pandemic will change our future teaching’, Religion and American Culture,
         30(2), pp.147–86. doi:Barrett-Fox, R.,
         et al. (2020) ‘How the Coronavirus pandemic will change our future teaching’,
         Religion and American Culture, 30(2), pp.147–86. https://doi.org/10.1017/rac.2020.10.
         
         
         94
         Benjamin, R. (2020) ‘Foreword’, in Stommel, J. Friend, C. and Morris, S. M.
         (eds.),
         Critical digital pedagogy: A collection. Hybrid
         Pedagogy Inc. Benjamin, R. (2020) ‘Foreword’, in Stommel, J., Friend, C., and
         Morris, S. M. (eds.),
         Critical digital pedagogy: A collection. Hybrid
         Pedagogy Inc. Available at: https://pressbooks.pub/cdpcollection/front-matter/foreword/
         (Accessed
         16 October 2024). 
         
         95
         Bordalejo, B.. . (2024.) ENG 3850/ HIST 3850 Paleography
         2023. Zenodo. doi: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.13941931. 
         
         96
         Davidson, C. N. (2020) ‘Why start with pedagogy? 4 good reasons, 4 good
         solutions’, in Stommel, J. Friend, C. and Morris, S. M. (eds.), Critical digital pedagogy:
         A collection. Hybrid Pedagogy
         Inc. Bordalejo, B., and Robinson, P. (2016) ‘Textual communities’, in Digital Humanities
         2016, pp. 876-77. Available at:
         https://lirias.kuleuven.be/retrieve/534266. (Accessed 25 April 2025).
         
         97
         Careaga-Butter, M., Badilla Quintana, M. G., and Fuentes-Henríquez, C. (2020)
         ‘Critical and prospective analysis of online education in pandemic and
         post-pandemic contexts’, Aloma: Revista de Psicologia,
         Ciències de l’Educació i de l’Esport, 38(2), pp. 23–32.
         https://doi.org/10.51698/aloma.2020.38.2.23-32. 
         
         98
         Davidson, C. N. (2020) ‘Why start with pedagogy? 4 good reasons, 4 good
         solutions’, in Stommel, J., Friend, C., and Morris, S. M. (eds.), Critical digital
         pedagogy: A collection. Hybrid Pedagogy
         Inc. Available at: https://pressbooks.pub/cdpcollection/chapter/why-start-with-pedagogy-4-good-reasons-4-good-solutions/.
         (Accessed: 16 October 2024). 
         
         99
         Edgar, A., and Sedgwick, P.R. (eds.). (1999) Key concepts in
         cultural theory. Key Concepts Series. London; New York: Routledge.
         
         100
         Fellmayer, J. (2020) ‘Disruptive pedagogy and the practice of freedom’, in
         Stommel, J. Friend, C. and Morris, S. M. (eds.), Critical
         digital pedagogy: A collection. Hybrid Pedagogy Inc. Edgar, A., and
         Sedgwick, P.R. (eds.) (1999) Key concepts in cultural
         theory. Key Concepts Series. London; New York: Routledge.
         
         101
         Fellmayer, J. (2020) ‘Disruptive pedagogy and the practice of freedom’, in
         Stommel, J., Friend, C., and Morris, S. M. (eds.), Critical
         digital pedagogy: A collection. Hybrid Pedagogy Inc. Available at: https://pressbooks.pub/cdpcollection/chapter/disruptive-pedagogy-and-the-practice-of-freedom/.
         (Accessed: 16 October 2024). 
         
         102
         Forti, L. (2023) Corpus use in italian language pedagogy:
         Exploring the effects of data-driven learning. 1st edn. Routledge
         Applied Corpus Linguistics. Abingdon, Oxon; New York, NY: Routledge.Forti, L.
         (2023) Corpus use in Italian language pedagogy: Exploring the
         effects of data-driven learning. 1st edn. Routledge Applied Corpus
         Linguistics. Abingdon, Oxon; New York, NY: Routledge.
         
         103
         Galbraith, C. S., and Merrill, G. B. (2012) ‘Academic and work-related burnout: A
         longitudinal study of working undergraduate university business students’, Journal
         of College Student Development, 53(3), pp.
         453–63. doi: https://doi.org/10.1353/csd.2012.0044453–63.
         https://doi.org/10.1353/csd.2012.0044.
         
         104
         Freire, P. (2000) Pedagogy of the oppressed. 30th
         anniversary edn. New York: Continuum.
         
         105
         Gleason, B., and Manca, S. (2020) ‘Curriculum and instruction: Pedagogical
         approaches to teaching and learning with Twitter in higher education’, On the Horizon,
         28(1), pp.1–8.
         
         106
         Hofer, S. I., Nistor, N., and Scheibenzuber, C. (2021) ‘Online teaching and
         learning in higher education: Lessons learned in crisis situations’, Computers in
         Human Behavior, 121 (August),106789. doi:
         https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2021.106789. 
         
         107
         hooks, b. 1994 Teaching to transgress: Education as the
         practice of freedom. New York: Routledge. 
         
         108
         Kim, D. (2018) Disrupting the digital humanities. 1st edn.
         Santa Barbara, CA: Punctum Books.
         
         109
         Lai, K.-W. (2011) ‘Digital technology and the culture of teaching and learning in
         higher education’, Australasian Journal of Educational
         Technology 27(8). doi:Freire, P. (2000) Pedagogy of
         the oppressed. 30th anniversary edn. New York: Continuum.
         
         110
         Gleason, B., and Manca, S. (2020) ‘Curriculum and instruction: Pedagogical
         approaches to teaching and learning with Twitter in higher education’, On the Horizon,
         28(1), pp.1–8.
         https://doi.org/10.1108/OTH-03-2019-0014.
         
         111
         Hofer, S. I., Nistor, N., and Scheibenzuber, C. (2021) ‘Online teaching and
         learning in higher education: Lessons learned in crisis situations’, Computers in
         Human Behavior, 121,106789.
         https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2021.106789. 
         
         112
         hooks, b. (1994) Teaching to transgress: Education as the
         practice of freedom. New York: Routledge. 
         
         113
         Kim, D. (2018) Disrupting the digital humanities. 1st edn.
         Santa Barbara, CA: Punctum Books.
         
         114
         Lai, K.-W. (2011) ‘Digital technology and the culture of teaching and learning in
         higher education’, Australasian Journal of Educational
         Technology 27(8). https://doi.org/10.14742/ajet.892.
         
         115
         Law, D. W. (2007) ‘Exhaustion in university students and the effect of coursework
         involvement’, Journal of American College Health, 55(4),
         pp. 239–245..
         doi: https://doi.org/10.3200/JACH.55.4.239-245https://doi.org/10.3200/JACH.55.4.239-245.
         
         116
         Lohr, A., Stadler, M., Schultz-Pernice, F., Chernikova, O., Sailer, M., Fischer,
         F., and Sailer, M. (2021) ‘On powerpointers, clickerers, and digital pros:
         Investigating the initiation of digital learning activities by teachers in
         higher education’, Computers in Human Behavior, 119
         (June), 106715. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2021.106715. 
         
         117
         Mauss, M. (1966) The gift: Forms and functions of exchange in
         archaic societies. London: Cohen and West LTD. 
         
         118
         Murphy, M. P. A. (2020) ‘COVID-19 and emergency eLearning: Consequences of the
         securitization of higher education for post-pandemic pedagogy’ Contemporary Security
         Policy, 41(3), pp. 492–505. doi:Lohr, A., et al.
         (2021) ‘On powerpointers, clickerers, and digital pros: Investigating the
         initiation of digital learning activities by teachers in higher education’, Computers
         in Human Behavior, 119, 106715.
         https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2021.106715. 
         
         119
         Mauss, M. (1966) The gift: Forms and functions of exchange in
         archaic societies. London: Cohen and West LTD. 
         
         120
         Murphy, M. P. A. (2020) ‘COVID-19 and emergency eLearning: Consequences of the
         securitization of higher education for post-pandemic pedagogy’, Contemporary Security
         Policy, 41(3), pp. 492–505. https://doi.org/10.1080/13523260.2020.1761749.
         
         
         121
         Rinaldo, S. B., Tapp, S., and Laverie, A.D. (2011) ‘Learning by tweeting: Using
         Twitter as a pedagogical tool’, Journal of Marketing
         Education, 33(2), pp. 193–203.
         
         122
         Rorabaugh, P. (2020) ‘Occupy the digital: Critical pedagogy and new media’, in
         Stommel, J. Friend, C. and Morris, S. M. (eds.), Critical
         digital pedagogy: A collection. Hybrid Pedagogy Inc. O’Donnell, D. P.
         (2016a) ‘A first law of humanities computing.’ Journal of Brief Ideas. Available
         at: http://beta.briefideas.org/ideas/2887a2c8127dea5e64e512ae7f6a2407. (Accessed
         25 April 2025).
         
         123
         O’Donnell, D. P., et al. (2016b). ‘The third academic freedom’, Light on Teaching,
         pp. 4–9. http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3596098.
         (Accessed 25 April 2025).
         
         124
         Rinaldo, S. B., Tapp, S., and Laverie, A.D. (2011) ‘Learning by tweeting: Using
         Twitter as a pedagogical tool’, Journal of Marketing
         Education, 33(2), pp. 193–203.
         https://doi-org.uleth.idm.oclc.org/10.1177/0273475311410852. 
         
         125
         Rorabaugh, P. (2020) ‘Occupy the digital: Critical pedagogy and new media’, in
         Stommel, J. Friend, C. and Morris, S. M. (eds.), Critical
         digital pedagogy: A collection. Hybrid Pedagogy Inc. Available at: https://pressbooks.pub/cdpcollection/chapter/occupy-the-digital-critical-pedagogy-and-new-media/.
         (Accessed: 16 October 2024).
         
         126
         Spencer, D. C. K. (2018) ‘Disrupting labor in digital humanities; Or, the
         classroom is not your crowd’, in D. Kim (ed.), Disrupting the
         digital humanities. 1st edn. Santa Barbara, CA: Punctum Books, pp.
         273–94.
         
         127
         Stommel, J., Friend, C., and Morris, M. S. (2020a) Critical
         digital pedagogy: A collection. Hybrid Pedagogy Inc.Robinson, P.,
         Nelson, B., and Klaassen, F. (2012) ‘The textual communities project’. Available
         at: https://www.interedition.eu/wp-content/bestanden/2012/03/7_2.pdf. (Accessed
         25 April 2025).
         
         128
         Robinson, P, and Solopova, E. (1993) ‘Guidelines for transcription of the
         manuscripts of the wife of bath’s prologue’, in: Blake, N.F., Robinson, P.M.W.
         (eds.), The Canterbury Tales Project Occasional Papers, Office
         for Humanities Communication Publications. Office for Humanities
         Communication, Oxford, pp. 19–52. https://doi.org/10.5281/ZENODO.11954055
         
         129
         Spencer, D. C. K. (2018) ‘Disrupting labor in digital humanities; Or, the
         classroom is not your crowd’, in D. Kim (ed.), Disrupting the
         digital humanities. 1st edn. Santa Barbara, CA: Punctum Books, pp.
         273–94.
         
         130
         Stack Overflow. (2024) ‘Stackoverflow developer survey’. Available at:
         https://survey.stackoverflow.co/2024/technology. (Accessed 25 April 2025).
         
         131
         Stommel, J., Friend, C., and Morris, M. S. (eds.) (2020a) Critical digital pedagogy:
         A collection. Hybrid Pedagogy Inc.
         Available at: https://pressbooks.pub/cdpcollection/. (Accessed
         16 October 2024).
         
         132
         ———. (2020b) “Introduction.” in Stommel, J. Friend, C. and Morris, S. M. (eds.),
         Critical digital pedagogy: A collection. Hybrid
         Pedagogy Inc. ———. (2020b) “Introduction”. in Stommel, J. Friend, C. and Morris,
         S. M. (eds.), Critical digital pedagogy: A collection.
         Hybrid Pedagogy Inc. Available at: https://pressbooks.pub/cdpcollection/front-matter/introduction/.
         (Accessed
         16 October 2024).
         
         133
         Torsello, C. S., Ackerley, K., and Castello, E. (2008) Corpora
         for university language teachers. vol. 74. Bristol: Peter Lang Group
         AG.
         
         134
         Thomas, J. D. E., and Blackwood, M. (2010) ‘Computer literacy and non-IS majors’,
         Information Systems Education Journal 8(58). https://eric.ed.gov/?id=EJ1146785. 
         
         135
         Torsello, C. S., Ackerley, K., and Castello, E. (eds.) (2008) Corpora for university
         language teachers. 74. Bristol: Peter Lang
         Group AG.
         
         136
         Wilcken, U. (1932) ‘Das Leydener Klammersystem’. Archiv Für
         Papyrusforschung 10, pp. 211–12.
         
         
         
         
         Preview  |  XML |  Print Article
         This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NoDerivatives 4.0 International
         License.
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
         </div>
   </body>
</html>