<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
      <title>[PREVIEW] DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly: Introduction</title>
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_screen.css" media="screen" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_print.css" media="print" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" /><style type="text/css">
        #mainContent {
          float: none;
          padding-top: 2em;
          padding-left: 4em;
          padding-right: 4em;
          margin-left: 225px;
           
        }</style></head>
   <body>
      <div id="mainContent">
         <div xmlns:dhqBiblio="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/ns/biblio" class="DHQarticle">
            <div id="pubInfo">Preview<br />Volume  Number 
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar">
               <form id="taporware" action="get">
                  <div><a href="/dhq/preview/index.html">Preview</a>
                      | 
                     <a rel="external" href="/dhq/vol///000215.xml">XML</a>
                     
                     | 
                     		   Discuss
                     			(<a href="/dhq/vol///000215/000215.html#disqus_thread" data-disqus-identifier="000215">
                        				Comments
                        			</a>)
                     
                  </div>
               </form>
            </div>
            
            <div class="DHQheader">
               
               
               
               
               <h1 class="articleTitle">Data Assemblages: A Call to Conceptualize Materiality in the
                  Academic Ecosystem
               </h1>
               
               <div class="author"><span style="color: grey">Nabeel Siddiqui</span> &lt;<a href="mailto:Nabeel88_at_gmail_dot_com" onclick="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('Nabeel88_at_gmail_dot_com'); return false;" onkeypress="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('Nabeel88_at_gmail_dot_com'); return false;">Nabeel88_at_gmail_dot_com</a>&gt;, College of William and Mary
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               <span class="Z3988" title="url_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;rft_val_fmt=info%3Aofi%2Ffmt%3Akev%3Amtx%3Ajournal&amp;rfr_id=info%3Asid%2Fzotero.org%3A2&amp;rft.genre=article&amp;rft.atitle=Data%20Assemblages%3A%20A%20Call%20to%20Conceptualize%20Materiality%20in%20the%20Academic%20Ecosystem&amp;rft.jtitle=Digital%20Humanities%20Quarterly&amp;rft.stitle=DHQ&amp;rft.issn=1938-4122&amp;rft.date=&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.aulast=Siddiqui&amp;rft.aufirst=Nabeel&amp;rft.au=Nabeel%20Siddiqui"> </span></div>
            
            
            <div id="DHQtext">
               
               
               <div id="abstract">
                  <h2>Abstract</h2>
                  
                  
                  <p>In this article, I seek to theoretically reconceptualize the bridge between
                     digital librarianship, especially data curation, and digital humanities in order
                     to more clearly see the independence of the two. The perceived immateriality of
                     scholarship is even more insidiously damaging to the digital humanities because
                     it reestablishes the privileging of conventional analogue scholarship above
                     curatorial pursuits. In this essay, I seek to counter this by positing the
                     notion of "data assemblages" as a partial solution. I begin
                     by briefly surveying the changing nature of research in the era of big data and
                     the attempts by both curators and others to make sense of its impact on the
                     academy. Next, I provide an overview of Gilles Deleuze’s notion of assemblages
                     as outlined by new materialist scholar Manuel DeLanda. By expanding on this
                     concept, I detail the way that "data assemblages" allow us to
                     more easily observe the analogous labor of traditional scholars, digital
                     humanists, and curators. I define data assemblages as the resulting end product
                     of curatorial and digital humanities labor that consists of material parts that
                     are contingent on their contextual relations and always in flux. Following this,
                     I use the Digital Public Library of America as a case study for my notion of
                     data assemblages. Finally, I conclude by demonstrating how this
                     reconceptualization moves beyond the merely theoretical to understand the
                     interdependency of individuals in the academic ecosystem, and more broadly,
                     permits us to reexamine the nature of materiality in the digital era.
                  </p>
                  
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
               <div class="counter"><a href="#p1">1</a></div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p1">Despite the prominence of the digital humanities, discussions surrounding the
                  assessment and nature of digital scholarship remain at the forefront of
                  un/conferences, workshops, and other academic gatherings. Although some prominent
                  organizations such as the Modern Language Association and American Historical
                  Association have begun to discuss how to evaluate digital scholarship, many digital
                  humanists continue to face backlash from peers, department chairs, and in many
                  cases, scholarly organizations [<a class="ref" href="#mla2013">Modern Language Association 2013</a>]
                  [<a class="ref" href="#denbo2014">Denbo2014</a>]. According to Patrik Svensson, "For tenure-track scholars, there is often a sense that
                  digital modes of representation may place you at a relative disadvantage.
                  Indeed, this may be outright advice from senior faculty and
                  administrators"
                   [<a class="ref" href="#svensson2010">Svensson 2010</a>]. 
               </div>
               
               <div class="counter"><a href="#p2">2</a></div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p2">At the same time, we have seen a shift in the types of people engaged in the digital
                  humanities. While early practitioners largely came from traditional disciplines,
                  digital librarians, data curators, alt-acs, and independent researchers are now just
                  as likely to be seen at digital humanities conferences as tenured/tenure-track
                  professors. Calls to reform scholarship in the digital age, however, have continued
                  to privilege the research of traditional faculty over other practitioners, although
                  both often generate similar products. As collaboration between different members of
                  the academic ecosystem increases, I contend that it is imperative we create a new
                  <em class="emph">theoretical</em> framework that adequately acknowledges the parallels
                  between the work of conventional scholars and others, especially librarians and
                  curators. In this essay, I hope to begin this reconceptualization by accentuating
                  the shared materiality of both text-heavy digital humanities scholarship and more
                  curatorial work through the notion of "data assemblages."
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="counter"><a href="#p3">3</a></div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p3"> According to Kathleen Fitzpatrick, scholars "need to let go of some of our fixation on the notion of
                  originality in scholarly production, recognizing that, in an environment in
                  which more and more discourse is available, some of the most important work
                  that we can do as scholars may more closely resemble contemporary editorial
                  or curatorial practices"
                   [<a class="ref" href="#fitzpatrick2011">Fitzpatrick 2011</a>, 12]. The focus on originality has limited digital humanities scholars, and it
                  privileges the work of some practitioners at the expense of others. As librarian
                  Dorothea Salo notes, "academia privileges its notion of research to such a degree
                  that it refuses to respect my praxis"
                   [<a class="ref" href="#salo2011">Salo 2011</a>]. Similarly, in response to the failure of some faculty to recognize the work
                  of curators and librarians as equal, Trevor Munoz argues that we should frame data
                  curation as a form of publishing. According to Munoz, "Data curation as a 'publishing' activity
                  is increasingly relevant to the working lives of digital humanities
                  scholars. Moreover, articulating connections between
                  'publishing' and data curation is important in the
                  context of strategic decisions libraries might make and, in fact, are making
                  about how to participate in 'publishing'"
                   [<a class="ref" href="#munoz2013">Munoz 2013</a>]. Overall, calls like Munoz’s and Salo’s highlight how the separation between
                  curation and conventional digital humanities scholarship has affected the ability
                  of
                  both to push research forward. 
               </div>
               
               <div class="counter"><a href="#p4">4</a></div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p4">As scholars move back and forth between conventional and
                  "alternative" academic positions, it becomes increasingly
                  necessary to examine the equivalences in labor for future job evaluations,
                  promotional reviews, and tenure requirements. A key reason why these evaluations
                  sometimes downplay curatorial work is because of an enduring perception of research
                  as disembodied practice. Jeanne Hamming and Helen Burgess make a similar contention
                  in their analysis of materialism in new media studies and scholarship [<a class="ref" href="#burgess2011">Burgess 2011</a>]. By drawing on the works of Bruno Latour, they highlight
                  that the detachment of the material from the intellectual is continuing evidence of
                  modernity’s inability to take hybrids and quasi-objects seriously. "This ongoing debate about new media’s functional (an in some cases
                  even biological) difference from old media," they claim, "contributes to a double erasure, for scholars working in
                  multimedia, of both their intellectual contributions and their material
                  labor"
                   [<a class="ref" href="#burgess2011">Burgess 2011</a>]. For Hamming and Burgess, it is important to examine the affordances and
                  restraints of materiality in intellectual research. Still, despite their
                  contentions, Hamming and Burgess maintain a rhetoric that continues to stress the
                  importance of "traditional" academic arguments. For instance, in
                  their discussion of Marcel O’Gorman’s <cite class="title italic">Dreadmill</cite>, they
                  point out that "he cites Nietzsche, Kittler, Virilio, Haraway,
                  Ernest Becker, among other scholars" in order to demonstrate his academic
                  authority [<a class="ref" href="#burgess2011">Burgess 2011</a>]. Nonetheless, a significant portion of
                  digital humanities scholarship does not contain a conventional thesis-driven
                  argument, and this discourse continues to reject many non-traditional forms of
                  academic labor. 
               </div>
               
               <div class="counter"><a href="#p5">5</a></div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p5">The perceived immateriality of scholarship is even more insidiously damaging to the
                  digital humanities because it reestablishes the privileging of conventional analogue
                  scholarship above curatorial pursuits. In this essay, I seek to counter this by
                  positing the notion of "data assemblages" as a partial solution.
                  I begin by briefly surveying the changing nature of research in the era of big data
                  and the attempts by both curators and others to make sense of its impact on the
                  academy. Next, I provide an overview of Gilles Deleuze’s notion of assemblages as
                  outlined by new materialist scholar Manuel DeLanda. By expanding on this concept,
                  I
                  detail the way that "data assemblages" allow us to more easily
                  observe the analogous labor of traditional scholars, digital humanists, and
                  curators. I define data assemblages as the resulting end product of curatorial and
                  digital humanities labor that consists of material parts that are contingent on
                  their contextual relations and always in flux. Following this, I use the Digital
                  Public Library of America as a case study for my notion of data assemblages.
                  Finally, I conclude by demonstrating how this reconceptualization moves beyond the
                  merely theoretical to understand the interdependency of individuals in the academic
                  ecosystem, and more broadly, permits us to reexamine the nature of materiality in
                  the digital era.
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">The Changing Nature of Scholarship in the Digital Era</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p6">6</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p6"> The overall impact of widespread data on academic research has yet to be seen.
                     Still, numerous groups have contended that this research will impact not only
                     scientific but also humanities research. In this section, I briefly examine how
                     scholars and librarians have viewed the emergence of big data and highlight how,
                     despite numerous attempts, a comprehensive foundation remains unavailable that
                     takes seriously the materiality of digital humanities labor <em class="emph">and</em> its
                     contextual and fluctuating nature.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p7">7</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p7"> According to Chris Anderson of <cite class="title italic">Wired</cite> Magazine, we
                     are now living in the Petabyte Age [<a class="ref" href="#anderson2008">Anderson 2008</a>]. For Anderson,
                     this mass quantity of available data is especially important for scholars
                     because it requires us to reexamine our methodological assumptions. According to
                     him, we do not need to know why numbers allow us to predict behavior. Instead, "the point is they do it, and we can track and measure
                     it with unprecedented fidelity. With enough data, the numbers speak for
                     themselves"
                      [<a class="ref" href="#anderson2008">Anderson 2008</a>]. The sciences have often led the charge in reevaluating their
                     epistemological assumptions in light of big data. Early attempts at examining
                     data in context emerged in informatics, but a more extensive movement arose in
                     the 2000s known as E-science. E-science provided a lens to deal with the massive
                     influx of data and the increased necessity of collaborative scholarship.
                     According to one group of early practitioners, E-science "enables a new order of collaborative, more
                     inter-disciplinary research, based on shared research expertise,
                     instruments and computing resources, and, crucially, increasing access
                     to collections of primary research data and information"
                      [<a class="ref" href="#lord2004">Lord 2004</a>]. Major scientific research now exists within this E-science paradigm. One
                     example is the Sloan Digital Sky Survey that has resulted in an opening up of
                     scholarship and a reassessment of the role of mass computational methods in
                     astronomical research. The team that led the project regarded it as the
                     beginning of a "fourth paradigm" in scientific
                     research [<a class="ref" href="#gray2002">Gray et al. 2002</a>]. Similarly, large computational methods have
                     begun to dominate the fields of bioengineering and physics. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p8">8</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p8">Data curation, a growing faction in library and information science, takes
                     seriously the claims of these scientific big data movements and seeks to address
                     the "data deluge" more thoroughly. The movement’s most direct
                     precedent is in the notion of digital curation. Digital curation, according to
                     Elizabeth Yakel, is "the active involvement of information professionals in
                     the management, including the preservation, of digital data for future
                     use"
                      [<a class="ref" href="#yakel2007">Yakel 2007</a>]. As Allen Renear and Trevor Munoz note, however, digital curation fails
                     to engage with the research needs of scholars. In contrast, they seek to reframe
                     <em class="emph">digital</em> curation as <em class="emph">data</em> curation. For them, "data curation addresses the challenge of maintaining
                     digital information that is produced in the course of research in a
                     manner that preserves its meaning <em class="emph">and</em> [emphasis mine]
                     usefulness as a potential input for further research"
                      [<a class="ref" href="#munoz2013">Munoz 2013</a>]. By taking the needs of researchers as critical to their own praxis, data
                     curators make apparent the need for scholars to find a way to recognize one
                     another’s work through a shared lens. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p9">9</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p9"> More broadly, library science has also taken up the question of context in the
                     gathering of resources through the concept of "collections."
                     Collections are important for research and scholarship because they recognize
                     that "the totality of the records provides information that
                     no individual record can"
                      [<a class="ref" href="#duff2002">Duff and Johnson 2002</a>]. In other words, they represent the need of understanding how material
                     develops in a particular environment. Still, the perceived materiality of
                     collections problematizes them as a framework for digital libraries. For
                     instance, Hur-Li Lee highlights, "The long history of the library being associated with a
                     physical building may have … made imagining virtual collections
                     difficult"
                      [<a class="ref" href="#lee2005">Lee 2005</a>]. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p10">10</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p10">Others have pushed to understand the relations between different materials
                     through the notion of "contextual mass." Contextual mass is a
                     principle that places an "emphasis on collecting materials that work together as
                     a system of sources, with meaningful interrelationships between
                     different types of materials and subjects, to support research
                     inquiry"
                      [<a class="ref" href="#palmer2010">Palmer, Zavalina, and Fenlon 2010</a>]. Collections based on the principle of "contextual
                     mass" can be of any size as long as their contextual relations
                     remain. The main problem with contextual mass, however, is that it perpetuates
                     an image of a non-fluctuating collection that serves as a singular totality. As
                     a result, the focus is on the materiality of the collection itself rather than
                     the larger fluctuating infrastructural needs of research.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p11">11</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p11">Despite changes in the library and science communities, humanities scholars, as a
                     whole, have been less likely to view themselves as requiring large-scale
                     infrastructure or needing to examine data contextually. One reason for this is
                     because of the nature of data that humanities scholars find important. Christine
                     Borgman notes, "the humanities and arts are the least likely of the
                     disciplines to generate their own data in the forms of observations,
                     models, or experiments"
                      [<a class="ref" href="#borgman2009">Borgman 2009</a>]. Humanities scholars are more likely to rely on data created by others —
                     i.e. diaries, literature, and films — than their own. Yet, this may be changing.
                     For instance, large-scale projects in corpus linguistics have gained traction in
                     the digital humanities community. Organizations, such as the HathiTrust, and
                     projects, such as Google Books, now require humanities scholars to seriously
                     examine the infrastructure encompassing their data. Furthermore, national and
                     international funding agencies are now taking data seriously before financing
                     humanities projects. The National Endowment of the Humanities, for instance, has
                     begun to require Data Management Plans in order to secure grant funding [<a class="ref" href="#neh">National Endowment for the Humanities</a>]. The often-ambiguous guidelines and regulations for these
                     plans demonstrate the embryonic nature of assessing digital materials. Yet, with
                     a large organization such as the NEH leading the charge, other granting agencies
                     will surely follow suit, and there will be an increased requirement for digital
                     humanities scholars to reassess how they share and store their data. Still, most
                     humanities scholars, outside of the digital humanities, are not trained in
                     computational methods, and the nature of humanities research often discourages
                     collaborative efforts that may yield new insights.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p12">12</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p12">All this is not to say, however, that humanities scholars have completely
                     neglected to examine changing infrastructural needs in the digital age. Digital
                     history pioneers Dan Cohen and Roy Rosenzsweig noted the difficulty of
                     large-scale information preservation [<a class="ref" href="#cohen2006">Cohen and Rosenzweig 2006</a>, 1–17].
                     Later, Rosenzsweig argued that the problem of digital infrastructure was no
                     longer the question of scarcity but of abundance. He feared that the massive
                     amount of information on the Internet would be too large to preserve and a large
                     record of cultural production would be lost. Rosenzsweig implored historians to
                     think "simultaneously about how to research, write, and teach
                     in a world of unheard of historical abundance and how to avoid a future
                     of record scarcity"
                      [<a class="ref" href="#rosenzweig2003">Rosenzweig 2003</a>]. In other words, because of the mass of information that was created on
                     the web there were fundamental issues involved in assessing what exactly we
                     should archive. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p13">13</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p13">Along with grappling with how to save digital data, humanities scholars have also
                     sought to create new degree programs that address the need for graduate training
                     in digital methods. Regarding an attempt to form a Master's Degree in Digital
                     Humanities at the University of Virginia, John Unsworth noted that the catalyst
                     for the degree was based on: 
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>
                           The simple observation that our culture and our cultural
                           heritage are migrating very rapidly to digital forms, and in order to
                           manage that migration and take advantage of the new intellectual and
                           creative possibilities it offers, we will need trained professionals who
                           understand both the humanities and information technology, and we will
                           need them in a number of different areas — in museums, libraries,
                           teaching, scholarship, publishing, government, communications,
                           entertainment, and elsewhere
                            [<a class="ref" href="#unsworth2001">Unsworth 2001</a>]
                           
                        </p>
                     </blockquote>. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p14">14</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p14">Despite these outliers, however, few humanities practitioners are deeply engaged
                     with the digital humanities. According to Shelia Anderson and Tobias Blanke, "Except for a small minority the humanities do not have
                     a tradition of dealing with machine algorithms, with the graphs produced
                     from statistical analysis, and the maps, trees and other forms of visual
                     representation that arise from big data analysis"
                      [<a class="ref" href="#anderson2012">Anderson 2012</a>]. As a result, humanities scholars, for the time being, will likely
                     continue to rely on curators and information science professionals trained in
                     handling large data structures, and a theoretical structure that acknowledges
                     the often-equal input of all camps is imperative.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Data Assemblages</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p15">15</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p15">Christine Borgman contends that one of the fundamental questions that digital
                     humanities needs to answer is that of "what are data?"
                      [<a class="ref" href="#borgman2009">Borgman 2009</a>]. For many, data exists in the immaterial space of the digital. The notion
                     of cyberspace as immaterial is a common one in science fiction, and popular
                     movies, such as <cite class="title italic">The Matrix</cite>, perpetuate an image of
                     the computer realm as something dream-like [<a class="ref" href="#wachowski1999">Wachowski 1999</a>]. This
                     association of cyberspace with the immaterial comes from pioneers of modern
                     science fiction, such as William Gibson. According to Gibson's definition of
                     cyberspace in <cite class="title italic">Neuromancer,</cite> cyberspace is an
                     illusory and hallucinogenic condition: 
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>
                           Cyberspace. A consensual hallucination experienced daily
                           by billions of legitimate operators, in every nation, by children being
                           taught mathematical concepts... A graphic representation of data
                           abstracted from the banks of every computer in the human system.
                           Unthinkable complexity. Lines of light ranged in the nonspace of the
                           mind, clusters and constellations of data. Like city lights,
                           receding
                            [<a class="ref" href="#gibson1984">Gibson 1984</a>, 51]
                           
                        </p>
                     </blockquote>. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p16">16</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p16">Of course, data <em class="emph">is</em> material. For example, although new computational
                     developments such as cloud computing harken to an ephemeral and illusory
                     cyberspace, they still make use of large-scale materiality through server farms.
                     As Jean-François Blanchette notes, "computing systems are suffused through and through with
                     the constraints of their materiality"
                      [<a class="ref" href="#blanchette2011">Blanchette 2011</a>]. In addition, Ian Bogost and Nick Montfort demonstrate that it is crucial
                     we take the materiality of computation seriously in our examinations of digital
                     culture [<a class="ref" href="#bogost2009">Bogost and Montfort 2009</a>]. Asserting data’s materiality, however, is
                     not enough. A more comprehensive framework is needed, and the digital humanities
                     has yet to provide a widely adopted ontological basis for research projects that
                     deviate from orthodox textual scholarship. Due to the nature of digital culture,
                     it is important that this ontological framework earnestly examine not only the
                     fluctuation of data but also the changing relationship between different forms
                     of data. As Joris van Zundert notes, "transformed by digital technology, text and digital
                     editions – digital humanities data in general, as a matter of fact–
                     become fluid, 'living', reaching a state wherein they
                     are perpetually in a digital information lifecycle"
                      [<a class="ref" href="#vanzundert2012">Van Zundert 2012</a>]. In order to provide a more comprehensive framework for digital projects
                     and to highlight the relationship between curation and conventional scholarship,
                     I examine Manuel DeLanda's expansion on Gilles Deleuze's notion of "assemblages" in his <cite class="title italic">New Philosophy
                        of Society</cite> as a partial solution. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p17">17</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p17">The concept of assemblages may be unfamiliar to many — although it is gaining
                     some academic interest — and a key contributor for this is that the literature
                     on it is nebulous and scattered throughout Deleuze’s work. DeLanda reformulates
                     Deleuzian assemblages into a comprehensive framework and seeks to broadly
                     examine social institutions through a realist perspective. However, instead of
                     viewing his framework as only relevant to social institutions, I adapt it as a
                     broader way to view digital humanities data and scholarship. Specifically,
                     through the notion of assemblages, I seek to conceptualize curatorial work and
                     digital humanities praxis as resulting in "data assemblages."
                     While curation has made a case for the reexamination of data management
                     techniques, it has often continued the rhetoric that poses a fundamental
                     dichotomy between research and curatorial activities. Curation, in this sense,
                     becomes a service that operates as the back-end of digital humanities work but
                     is not an equal part of it. Data assemblages, on the other hand, provide one way
                     to help curators and digital humanities scholars move forward while
                     acknowledging their reliance on one another. By reframing the notion of
                     projects, collections, and research as data assemblages, we can see the dynamic
                     relationship between various groups and productions in the digital humanities. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p18">18</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p18"> Assemblages in their most basic definition are material component parts that
                     form wholes. These wholes are notable in that they resist totalities and are
                     made up of assemblages themselves. DeLanda asks us to remove the Hegelian focus
                     on relations of interiority because the autonomy of component parts is
                     questionable in a framework that defines their very characteristics based on
                     their relative relationships. Instead, assemblages focus on relations of
                     exteriority. These relations of exteriority are not exhaustive of the
                     ontological properties of a component part. For instance, if an arm becomes
                     removed from a body in a relationship of interiority it fails to be an arm. In
                     contrast, in relationships of exteriority, the arm has the potential to maintain
                     some aspects of itself as it becomes part of a new system of relations [<a class="ref" href="#delanda2006">DeLanda 2006</a>, 9–11]. As a result, component parts become
                     fluctuating in assemblages, or as DeLanda states, "a component part of an assemblage may be detached from
                     it and plugged into a different assemblage in which its interactions are
                     different"
                      [<a class="ref" href="#delanda2006">DeLanda 2006</a>, 10]. Component parts, notably, also remain in flux and are made up of
                     different assemblages themselves.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p19">19</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p19"> In a data assemblage, the same focus on materiality allows us to reorganize our
                     thinking of bits and their role in research. As noted earlier, data are
                     material, and their material existence is not contingent on their relationships
                     in curatorial practice. This moves away from earlier notions such as
                     "collections" and "contextual mass"
                     where the relationship between components is so strong that their
                     characteristics within a new framework are problematic. Notably, while data
                     curation allows us to gather bits in an assemblage that can then be used for
                     further research, it perpetuates the perception that curation is done for
                     research purposes rather than something ontologically analogous. In data
                     assemblages, this is altered, as the relationships of interiority are no longer
                     characteristic of the material but rather by relationships of exteriority. This
                     allows us to maintain a focus on contextual relationships while still resisting
                     totalities, and also allows us as researchers to focus on some aspects of data,
                     even those assembled by data curators. Scholars can reconfigure this data for
                     their own personal research, and the component’s relation of exteriority changes
                     from one data assemblage (explicitly that of the libraries) to the data
                     assemblage of the researcher (namely the project). Because the results of these
                     data assemblages are not dichotomous but mutually reinforcing, they allow us to
                     more clearly see the link between curatorial and text-heavy work. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p20">20</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p20"> Assemblage theory is not only notable for stressing the material characteristics
                     of data, but also because it provides an additional framework for the
                     examination of these material parts. Through a framework of three separate
                     dimensions that link with three corresponding axes of assemblages, assemblages
                     become more than just a focus on the need to assess fluctuation in ontology.
                     Each axis allows us to investigate the link between digital materials and their
                     corresponding data assemblages. I go through each axis individually using the
                     example of a literature review. While some may contend that literature reviews
                     are only used in conjunction with larger scholarly pieces, this is not always
                     true. Perhaps, most prominently, scholars often publish literature reviews in
                     journals as articles overviewing the state of disciplinary fields, and graduate
                     students sometimes submit them separately before embarking on the dissertation
                     and thesis. Nonetheless, the general framework should be applicable to other
                     forms of print scholarship. While such an exercise may seem tedious, I believe
                     it will more lucidly describe the link between analogue and digital modes of
                     scholarship. In addition, I also emphasize what each axis means in the spectrum
                     of data curation and digital humanities praxis.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p21">21</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p21"> The first dimension of data assemblages focuses on the material and expressive
                     roles of components [<a class="ref" href="#delanda2006">DeLanda 2006</a>, 12]. The material role of
                     assemblage parts correspond to their physical existence within an ecosystem, and
                     in the case of the literature review, these are the actual books and articles.
                     Often, scholars creating literature reviews will make copies of relevant pages
                     and cut them up into different sections. They then place the different pieces
                     thematically to create sections of an outline. The materiality of conventional
                     research becomes more apparent through this process. In data assemblages, the
                     material roles of component parts exist on one end of an axis with the
                     expressive role on the opposite end. These are the actual characteristics of the
                     books and articles, such as their color and form. These expressive roles should
                     not be understood as inherent characteristics of a component part but rather as
                     also contingent and in flux.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p22">22</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p22"> The most obvious analogy of material and expressive component parts in current
                     digital media scholarship is within the framework of Matthew Kirshenbaum’s data
                     forensics. For Kirschenbaum, like DeLanda, focusing solely on the material
                     structure is problematic. He posits that the material can be further broken down
                     into forensic and formal materiality [<a class="ref" href="#kirschenbaum2012">Kirschenbaum 2012</a>]. Forensic
                     materiality focuses on individualization and the reduction of physical matter
                     [<a class="ref" href="#kirschenbaum2012">Kirschenbaum 2012</a>, 12]. Formal materiality, on the other
                     hand, are the "imposition of multiple-relational
                     computational states on a data set or digital object"
                     [<a class="ref" href="#kirschenbaum2012">Kirschenbaum 2012</a>, 12]. For Kirschenbaum, formal materiality
                     can be understood as the "relative or just-in-time dimension of materiality, one
                     where any material particulars are arbitrary and independent of the
                     underlying computational environment and are instead solely the function
                     of the imposition of a specific formal regimen on a given set of data
                     and the resulting contrast to any other available alternative
                     regimens"
                      [<a class="ref" href="#kirschenbaum2012">Kirschenbaum 2012</a>, 13]. It provides the illusion of immateriality in the material. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p23">23</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p23">Because Kirschenbaum seeks to maintain the ontological distinctiveness of
                     material objects through their reductive individualized traces, he is often
                     ambiguous on the distinction between formal materiality and forensic materiality
                     in things such as firmware. He implores us to not draw an analogy between the
                     formal and forensic and hardware and software, since this hardline distinction
                     is itself a result of industrial practices by companies such as IBM [<a class="ref" href="#kirschenbaum2012">Kirschenbaum 2012</a>, 14]. Data assemblages remove this
                     ambiguity by not only making the fluidity of the forensic a critical aspect of
                     the material but also by leaving open the possibility of the heterogeneous
                     nature of expressive and material forms. In data assemblages, the material role
                     is exemplified by the electrical impulses in data. The expressive role
                     represents the forms that these electrical impulses take. These roles and
                     materials are constantly shifting allowing for a more formal structure to
                     understand heterogeneous entities such as firmware. As DeLanda notes "these roles are material and may occur in mixtures,
                     that is, a given component may play a mixture of material and expressive
                     roles by conveying different sets of capacities"
                      [<a class="ref" href="#delanda2006">DeLanda 2006</a>, 12]. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p24">24</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p24"> The second axis deals with the territorial and deterritorial roles of
                     assemblages [<a class="ref" href="#delanda2006">DeLanda 2006</a>, 12–13]. DeLanda cautions us
                     against viewing assemblages as totalities but instead as continuously
                     fluctuating collections of material. Territorialization is the process of
                     component parts of an assemblage coming together. These can be
                     "accidental" and evolutionary in nature or purposeful
                     curatorial acts. Deterittorialization, on the other hand, represents the
                     opposite process of breaking apart assemblages. Again, these parts do not lose
                     their autonomy because their characteristics are not contingent on their
                     relationships of interiority. In the example of the literature review, the
                     reviewer exemplifies the territorializing aspect of the assemblage by placing
                     corresponding works in distinctive sections of the literature review. He or she
                     can also remove parts from different sections, and this exemplifies
                     deterittorialization. Normally, things that we have traditionally seen as having
                     "agency," such as sentient beings, deterritorialize
                     assemblages, but non-sentient beings can also engage in the process. In this
                     sense, data assemblages take seriously the role of quasi-objects and the need to
                     reexamine what Latour refers to as the modernist constitution, which views
                     nature and society as unattached [<a class="ref" href="#latour1993">Latour 1993</a>, 13–48]. For
                     instance, a fire can erupt in the location where the reviewer is conducting his
                     research and cause the materiality of his work to become ash. In either case,
                     the deterittorialization of the assemblages requires reexamining the
                     relationship between various component parts. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p25">25</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p25"> In data assemblages, the territorialization and deterittorialization of
                     component parts are a result of the labor of digital humanities scholars and
                     curators. For instance, as curators organize and collect these assemblages, they
                     create new data assemblages made up of material components. Databases, in this
                     sense, are digital materials that create larger digital infrastructure. Similar
                     to how a scholar creates a literature review, digital humanities projects
                     reconfigure electrical material into assemblages. Projects as diverse as digital
                     historical maps and text mining initiatives are all, in this sense,
                     ontologically analogous.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p26">26</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p26"> The third and final dimension of assemblages corresponds to a coding/decoding
                     axis [<a class="ref" href="#delanda2006">DeLanda 2006</a>, 14–16]. In many ways, this dimension
                     should not be considered separate from the territorialization and
                     deterittorialization dimension but as intertwined. Linguistic and genetic
                     phenomena can be seen as part of this dimension. These are special cases that
                     often provide the illusion of the immaterial and work at multiple scales of
                     assemblages. Still, they contain a material functionality. Case in point, DNA
                     represents a physical chromosome structure while language represents
                     neurological phenomenon. These help in territorializing assemblages by giving
                     them distinct linguistic structures. According to DeLanda, language often causes
                     us to lose site of relationships because of the "linguisticality of experience, that is, the idea than
                     an otherwise undifferentiated phenomenological field is cut up into
                     discrete entities by the meanings of the general term"
                      [<a class="ref" href="#delanda2006">DeLanda 2006</a>, 45]. In a literature review, such a form of coding exists in the linguistic
                     assertion of the arrangement itself, and the act of a scholar declaring the
                     literature review as complete and ready for submission. A coding function also
                     manifests itself in regards to the transitions and thesis of the literature
                     review itself and highlights the way that coding can affect assemblages in
                     diverse scalarity. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p27">27</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p27"> In data assemblages, the coding/decoding dimension is exemplified by the
                     assertion of collections as singular totalities and metadata. Research projects
                     and curatorial collections of data are not ontologically separate from one
                     another but become distinct through this linguistic maneuvering. Due to the
                     algorithmic coding of computer software, a territorialization of bits exists
                     that move through the material structure of the computer processing unit. For
                     librarianship, a more pertinent example is metadata that provides the
                     ontological significance of material along with an examination of the
                     connections between these materials. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p28">28</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p28"> Together, the three dimensions of data assemblages provide an additional
                     framework for the discussion surrounding data curation and digital humanities.
                     It also permits us to examine the various aspects of digital materiality and see
                     their relationship between one another without ontologically confining them to
                     relationships of interiority. I believe that such a framework makes it easier to
                     create collaborative opportunities between different groups in the digital
                     humanities because it posits the emergence of data assemblages as the resulting
                     outcome of <em class="emph">both</em> research and curatorial labor. 
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Case Study: The Digital Public Library of America</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p29">29</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p29"> In order to provide an overview of how this framework works with an actual
                     project, I use the Digital Public Library of America (DPLA) as a case study for
                     data assemblages. The organization began in 2010 with forty leaders and sought
                     to make "an open, distributed network of comprehensive online
                     resources that would draw on the nation’s living heritage from
                     libraries, universities, archives, and museums in order to educate,
                     inform, and empower everyone in current and future generations"
                      [<a class="ref" href="#dpla">About DPLA</a>]. Through the support of the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation and the Berkman
                     Center for Internet and Society at Harvard University, the DPLA launched after
                     nearly two years of planning in April 2013. Although it calls itself a library,
                     it does not circulate any non-digital materials and at this time, does not
                     create new conventional content itself. Instead, it curates the digital metadata
                     of other libraries and cultural heritage organizations and puts them in one
                     place for easy access. Through this aggregating approach, the DPLA has been able
                     to create partnerships with the HathiTrust, the Smithsonian Institute, the
                     Internet Archive, and the Library of Congress. Still, despite its success,
                     measuring the academic impact of the DPLA as a scholarly project remains
                     difficult because the link between curatorship and scholarship is unclear. By
                     reassessing the DPLA as a data assemblage, I seek to demonstrate that the DPLA’s
                     efforts are ontologically analogous to other scholarly activities, such as a
                     literature review. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p30">30</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p30"> The DPLA is an important case study for the scholarly use of data assemblages
                     for three important reasons. First, created by a largely academic organization
                     housed at Harvard University, it requires constant funding and infrastructural
                     requirements from scholarly resources, and these often cut into and compete from
                     funding for more orthodox academic research. By examining the DPLA’s
                     relationship to routine scholarship, we can better make sense of the pitfalls
                     and benefits of sharing and competing for the same resources. Second, created by
                     both academics and other leaders, the DPLA makes apparent the collaborative and
                     similar nature of traditional scholarship and curatorship. This convergence of
                     roles is important not only for collaboration but for future tenure reviews and
                     job evaluations as individuals move more fluidly between academia and
                     infrastructure customarily seen as supporting it. For instance, Dan Cohen, the
                     current Executive Director of the DPLA, gave up his professorship at George
                     Mason University to head the organization. For Cohen, his movement to the DPLA
                     advanced the work he already did in academia at the Roy Rosenzweig Center for
                     History and New Media [<a class="ref" href="#cohen2013">Cohen 2013</a>]. Yet, in the current academic
                     climate his work at the DPLA, would not count towards a tenure review. Finally,
                     the DPLA is an important analysis of data assemblages because it outlines many
                     of the same elements in its philosophy, "three main
                     elements," and mission. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p31">31</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p31"> The collective nature of the components that the DPLA aggregates exemplifies the
                     material and expressive components of the first axis of data assemblages. The
                     DPLA’s "Philosophy" page illustrates the importance
                     of materiality for the organization: "To help organize and structure metadata, the DPLA falls
                     back on some pretty philosophical concepts. Perhaps the most important
                     of these is the idea that things in the physical world can be
                     represented at a number of different levels"
                      [<a class="ref" href="#dplac">Philosophy-DPLA</a>]. While the DPLA turns each item into metadata that it aggregates, this
                     accumulation also results in the material bits of these items to become
                     flattened ontologically as they move through the DPLA’s servers. The expressive
                     component of the first axis deals with the forms of these bits, and by
                     manipulating the arrangement of electricity, the DPLA is able to create an
                     aggregation of metadata that it allows others to handle. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p32">32</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p32"> The territorialization and deterittorialization of material bits is, in many
                     ways, the core of the DPLA’s mission. On it’s "About"
                     page, the organization lists "three main elements"
                     that outline the nature of the DPLA. The first of these focuses on how the DPLA
                     seeks to be "a <em class="emph">portal</em> [emphasis in original] that
                     delivers students, teachers, scholars, and the public to incredible
                     resources, wherever they may be in America"
                      [<a class="ref" href="#dpla">About DPLA</a>]. In the parlance of data assemblages, this portal is a result of the
                     territorializaiton of material bits in different libraries and cultural heritage
                     organizations. The second main element of the DPLA demonstrates its role in
                     deterritorializing these material bits. According to the organization, the DPLA
                     seeks to be "A <em class="emph">platform</em> [emphasis in original] that
                     enables new and transformative uses of our digitized cultural
                     heritage"
                      [<a class="ref" href="#dpla">About DPLA</a>]. The organization hopes to accomplish this using Application Programming
                     Interfaces (APIs) that permit others to manipulate the its own data. For
                     instance, <cite class="title italic">Serendip-o-matic</cite>, an application built in
                     a single week for the One Week | One Tool project at the Roy Rosenzweig Center
                     for History and New Media, allows scholars to search for relevant sources in the
                     DPLA using any text they may have [<a class="ref" href="#serendip2013">Serendip-o-matic Team 2013</a>]. By doing so,
                     the application lets them deterritorialize material bits on its servers and
                     manipulate them to make curatorship easier and more integral to scholarly
                     research. The importance of examining relations of exteriority also becomes more
                     evident. As Catherine Adams and Terrie Lynn Thompson highlight, "Within a sociomaterial reading, data is not really a
                     thing but rather a relational effect: it is what it is in a particular
                     moment because of the temporal and spatial networks of relations in
                     which it is ensnared"
                      [<a class="ref" href="#adams2014">Adams and Thompson 2014</a>]. As these bits move through various networks, coding and decoding
                     perpetuate the perception of these bits as frozen totalities. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p33">33</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p33">The third axis of coding/decoding corresponds to the process of declaring
                     discrete material entities as unified wholes. The DPLA’s main website
                     exemplifies this by fashioning bits in curatorial form as virtual timelines,
                     maps, and exhibits. As mentioned earlier, we should not view the coding and
                     decoding aspects as necessarily different from the territorializing and
                     deterritorializing aspects as both highlight our ability to see things as
                     distinct or compiled. Furthermore, along with manipulating the coding and
                     decoding of its own resources, the DPLA also makes a concentrated effort to
                     understand the linguistic and rhetorical moves that work for and against it as a
                     library. Case in point, in its final "main element,"
                     the DPLA seeks to be "an advocate for a strong <em class="emph">public option
                        </em>[emphasis in original] in the twenty-first century"
                      [<a class="ref" href="#dpla">About DPLA</a>]. Specifically, it hopes to create a way for people to have access to
                     different sources of knowledge, and it presents itself in a longer line of
                     public libraries in America. This rhetorical move flattens the dissimilarity
                     between digital libraries from more traditional ones.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p34">34</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p34">Still, despite its success, the DPLA continues to face numerous challenges. While
                     the academic community is supportive of the organization’s mission, it continues
                     to view the activities as secondary to scholarly research. The lack of a
                     scholarly thesis or traditional format also means that the labor of those in the
                     DPLA may seem less valuable in future tenure reviews or job applications. As a
                     curatorial activity in the library community, the DPLA has a better record in
                     gaining support, although criticisms were prominent before launch [<a class="ref" href="#enis2013">Enis 2013</a>]. As one group of curators notes, "Digital aggregations can provide essential
                     metastructures for unifying distributed content…. however, the act of
                     bringing together and providing access to a large number of collections
                     does not guarantee that the resulting aggregation will be a useful
                     resource for researchers"
                      [<a class="ref" href="#palmer2010">Palmer, Zavalina, and Fenlon 2010</a>]. By reexamining the materiality of both scholarly and curatorial
                     activities as data assemblages, the work of both becomes more fluid and the link
                     between the two becomes more apparent and continuous. 
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Implications for Future Research and Collaborations</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p35">35</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p35">According to Sayeed Choudhury, Mike Furlough, and Joyce Ray: 
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>
                           We have on the one hand, a community, or a subset of
                           several communities, that has been working on the "back
                           end" of digital production from the generation of raw data
                           to the construction of an organized product that can be accessed, and,
                           on the other hand, another community — publishers — who work on the
                           "front end" of scholarly communications, from
                           manuscripts to publication
                            [<a class="ref" href="#choudhury2012">Choudhury, Furlough, and Ray 2012</a>]
                           
                        </p>
                     </blockquote>. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p36">36</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p36">Data assemblages provide a structure for future digital humanities research that
                     collapses this dichotomous vision of back-end and front-end digital production.
                     While scholars of the humanities have increasingly pushed for interdisciplinary
                     research, the resulting methodologies have continued to stress endeavors
                     traditionally considered “academic.” This has forced curators and librarians to
                     continuously reassess the work they do with a focus on orthodox researchers.
                     This same attention on research needs, however, has resulted in a glancing over
                     of the importance of curatorial activities as something valuable in and of
                     themselves. Data assemblages, as a result, have broad implications for curators,
                     digital humanists, and the broader digital age beyond the mere theoretical. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p37">37</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p37"> For curators, the notion of data assemblages allows us a way to view curation as
                     an activity in and of itself. Tenure, in traditional academic settings, has
                     relied on the dissemination of scholarly information, usually in the form of
                     published articles. While such scholarly publications are important, they
                     perpetuate, at least in the humanities, an ideal of the lone scholar working
                     outside of any broader non-academic infrastructure. Curators in this context
                     fail to be given due credit for their work despite being in the academic
                     ecosystem and often must rely on the occasional acknowledgement within a
                     scholarly monograph for appreciation of their labor. In many ways, this
                     problematizes not only the way that conventional scholars view research but also
                     the ways curators see their work. As Trevor Munoz and Julia Flanders write, "data curation is…both a scholarly research area and a
                     praxis and, increasingly, data curation too uses a distinct methodology
                     to advance itself as both a discipline and a profession"
                      [<a class="ref" href="#flanders2011">Flanders and Muñoz 2011</a>]. These curatorial activities will be critical to researchers, especially
                     since groups like the data curation community take the link between their work
                     and other researchers to be central to their praxis. The data assemblage model
                     pushes this further by asking us to question the distinction between research
                     and curatorial activities altogether. Because all data assemblages exist on an
                     ontologically flat surface, these activities should not be differentiated from —
                     or at least not seen as antithetical to — scholarly publication. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p38">38</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p38"> For digital humanists, the data assemblage model, along with causing us to
                     question the nature of scholarly publishing, allow us to create new forms of
                     scholarly activities that are not oriented around traditional narrative
                     structures: maps, games, databases, etc. In other words, the larger digital
                     ecosystem causes us to reexamine our scholarly publishing and also revise the
                     role of diverse media formats in the academy. By viewing scholarly activity as
                     something that must be in the form of print, we perpetuate the notion that
                     narrative structures are the only meaningful forms of communication.
                     Unfortunately, the coding ability of narrative is hard to get away from, and
                     digital scholars should be wary of viewing their activity as separate from data
                     curation and vice versa due to these narrative characteristics. Of course, the
                     value of scholarship is not strictly in the format it takes but also in its
                     ability to stay in conversation with other scholars. Curatorial activities,
                     however, also do this when they seek collaboration with other curators. While
                     these activities are not stated explicitly as scholarly dialogue, we should be
                     wary to discount them as existing in a structural vacuum.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p39">39</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p39">More broadly, the notion of data assemblages allows us to reconsider our place in
                     the digital ecosystem. According to Matthew Kirshenbaum, we must confront
                     shifting of society to the .txtual condition. As he shows, "the preservation of digital objects is <em class="emph">logically
                        inseparable</em> from the act of their creation — the lag between
                     creation and preservation collapses completely, since a digital object
                     may only ever be said to be preserved <em class="emph">if</em> it is accessible,
                     and each individual access creates the object anew"
                      [<a class="ref" href="#kirschenbaum2013">Kirschenbaum 2013</a>]. In other words, a deep examination of digital material shows that access
                     and duplication are inherent to the digital world, and there is no separation of
                     access from creation. We can never really touch the same file because the
                     postmodern nature of computers means files are continuously located in new
                     memory, which are fluctuating electrical pulses. Such electrical impulses are
                     themselves part of a slow evolution into the computer that begins with parts
                     assembled throughout the world. Kirshenbaum argues that the
                     "fingerprint" of the files that we touch in the .txtual
                     condition causes them to change. Of course, the same fingerprints apply to the
                     real world, as criminal forensics has made clear. Even without the discussion
                     surrounding the ontological status of the book, the readings of it are surely
                     not the same as one another. We see that the assemblage of the book changes
                     along with the data itself, as it is stored in and out of the correlating
                     neurological memory of the observer. In data assemblages, no claims to
                     ontological totalities are made. As a result, the .txtual condition vanishes, or
                     at least becomes temporarily manageable. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p40">40</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p40">Furthermore, data assemblages expand on our understanding of ourselves in the
                     digital environment and as researchers. New media scholar Lesley Gourlay argues, "The academy has become saturated by technologies to the
                     point that there can be no meaningful distinction made between digital
                     and analogue, embodied and virtual, 'face-to-face'
                     and 'online'"
                      [<a class="ref" href="#gourlay2011">Gourlay 2011</a>]. In their examination of digital materialities and posthumanism,
                     Catherine Adams and Terrie Lynn Thompson discuss the need for four
                     <em class="emph">posthuman fluencies</em>
                     [<a class="ref" href="#adams2014">Adams and Thompson 2014</a>]. The first and second of these fluencies deals with
                     our ability to understand our shared agency with digital technology and the way
                     that these digital technologies lead to a de-skilling and up-skilling of
                     research activity. Data assemblages make this shared agency more apparent since
                     the ability to territorialize and deterritorialize not only deals with sentient
                     agency, such as humans, but also, as in Latourian actor-network-theory, the
                     agency of non-sentient actors such as computers, cameras, and servers. The third
                     of these posthuman agencies deal with the ability for data to become frozen in
                     time for research and the importance of flux for data assemblages. "When data is viewed as frozen <em class="emph">but</em> [emphasis in
                     original] lively and mobile," write Adams and Thompson, "new enactments and understandings of data are
                     possible"
                      [<a class="ref" href="#adams2014">Adams and Thompson 2014</a>]. The final of these agencies concerns the importance of understanding the
                     tensions and affordances that come with increased collaboration and
                     fragmentation of research practices. By viewing curatorial and digital
                     humanities scholarship as data assemblages, these posthuman fluencies become
                     more apparent and allow us as scholars to grapple with new questions about our
                     research praxis in the digital age. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p41">41</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p41">As digital humanities increases as a field, the need to examine our
                     methodological assumptions will be more apparent. The field has defined itself
                     as a revolutionary force in the academy, and this same revolutionary impulse
                     provides scholars a leg up in collaborative techniques that bridge curatorship
                     with more conventional digital humanities scholarship. As Kathleen Fitzpatrick
                     notes, "the key problems that we face again and again are
                     social rather than technological in nature: problems of encouraging
                     participation in collaborative and collective projects, of developing
                     sound preservation and sustainability practices, of inciting
                     institutional change, of promoting new ways of thinking about how
                     academic work might be done in the coming years"
                      [<a class="ref" href="#fitzpatrick2010">Fitzpatrick 2010</a>]. This piece sought to outline one way to increase collaboration and
                     acknowledgement by recognizing the material ecosystem surrounding digital
                     scholarship. Still, it is not perfect, and I hope that others will carry out
                     further research and reconceptualization to make the link between the curation
                     and conventional scholarship even more clear.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
               
            </div>
            
            <div id="worksCited">
               <h2>Works Cited</h2>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="dpla">
                     <!-- close -->About DPLA</span> Digital Public Library of America, About
                  DPLA. Available at: <a class="ref" href="http://dp.la/info/" onclick="window.open('http://dp.la/info/'); return false">http://dp.la/info/</a>
                  [Accessed September 15, 2014a].
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="adams2014">
                     <!-- close -->Adams and Thompson 2014</span> Adams, C. &amp; Thompson,
                  T.L., 2014. Interviewing the Digital Materialities of Posthuman Inquiry:
                  Decoding the encoding of research practices. In <cite class="title italic">Proceedings
                     of the 9th International Conference on Networked Learning</cite>. Ninth
                  International Conference on Networked learning. Edinburgh. Available at: <a class="ref" href="http://www.networkedlearningconference.org.uk/abstracts/pdf/adams.pdf" onclick="window.open('http://www.networkedlearningconference.org.uk/abstracts/pdf/adams.pdf'); return false">http://www.networkedlearningconference.org.uk/abstracts/pdf/adams.pdf</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="anderson2008">
                     <!-- close -->Anderson 2008</span> Anderson, C., 2008. The End of
                  Theory. <cite class="title italic">Wired Magazine</cite>, 16. Available at: <a class="ref" href="http://www.simulex.it/Materiali/Articoli/Chris%20Anderson-The%20end%20of%20theory.doc" onclick="window.open('http://www.simulex.it/Materiali/Articoli/Chris%20Anderson-The%20end%20of%20theory.doc'); return false">http://www.simulex.it/Materiali/Articoli/Chris%20Anderson-The%20end%20of%20theory.doc</a>
                  [Accessed July 2, 2013].
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="anderson2012">
                     <!-- close -->Anderson 2012</span> Anderson, S. &amp; Blanke, T.,
                  2012. Taking the long view: from e-science humanities to humanities digital
                  ecosystems. <cite class="title italic">Historical Social Research/Historische
                     Sozialforschung</cite>, pp.147–164.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="blanchette2011">
                     <!-- close -->Blanchette 2011</span> Blanchette, J.-F., 2011. A
                  Material History of Bits. <cite class="title italic">Journal of the American Society
                     for Information Science and Technology</cite>, 62(6), pp.1042–1057.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="bogost2009">
                     <!-- close -->Bogost and Montfort 2009</span> Bogost, I. &amp;
                  Montfort, N., 2009. Platform Studies: Frequently Questioned Answers. In Digital
                  Arts and Culture 2009. UC Irvine. Available at: <a class="ref" href="http://escholarship.org/uc/item/01r0k9br" onclick="window.open('http://escholarship.org/uc/item/01r0k9br'); return false">http://escholarship.org/uc/item/01r0k9br</a> [Accessed July 12,
                  2013].
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="borgman2009">
                     <!-- close -->Borgman 2009</span> Borgman, C.L., 2009. The Digital
                  Future is Now: A call to Action for the Humanities. <cite class="title italic">Digital
                     humanities quarterly</cite>, 3(4). Available at: <a class="ref" href="http://works.bepress.com/borgman/233/" onclick="window.open('http://works.bepress.com/borgman/233/'); return false">http://works.bepress.com/borgman/233/</a> [Accessed July 2, 2013].
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="burgess2011">
                     <!-- close -->Burgess 2011</span> Burgess, H.J. &amp; Hamming, J.,
                  2011. New Media in the Academy: Labor and the Production of Knowledge in
                  Scholarly Multimedia. , 5(3). Available at: <a class="ref" href="http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/5/3/000102/000102.html" onclick="window.open('http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/5/3/000102/000102.html'); return false">http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/5/3/000102/000102.html</a>
                  [Accessed August 18, 2014].
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="choudhury2012">
                     <!-- close -->Choudhury, Furlough, and Ray 2012</span> Choudhury,
                  S., Furlough, M. &amp; Ray, J., 2012. Digital Curation and E-Publishing:
                  Libraries Make the Connection. In Against the Grain Press, pp. 476–483.
                  Available at: <a class="ref" href="http://docs.lib.purdue.edu/charleston/2009/OutofBox/2/" onclick="window.open('http://docs.lib.purdue.edu/charleston/2009/OutofBox/2/'); return false">http://docs.lib.purdue.edu/charleston/2009/OutofBox/2/</a> [Accessed July
                  11, 2013].
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="cohen2013">
                     <!-- close -->Cohen 2013</span> Cohen, D., 2013. The Digital Public
                  Library of America, Me, and You. <cite class="title italic">Dan Cohen</cite>.
                  Available at: <a class="ref" href="http://www.dancohen.org/2013/03/05/the-digital-public-library-of-america-me-and-you/" onclick="window.open('http://www.dancohen.org/2013/03/05/the-digital-public-library-of-america-me-and-you/'); return false">http://www.dancohen.org/2013/03/05/the-digital-public-library-of-america-me-and-you/</a>
                  [Accessed September 15, 2014].
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="cohen2006">
                     <!-- close -->Cohen and Rosenzweig 2006</span> Cohen, D.J. &amp;
                  Rosenzweig, R., 2006. <cite class="title italic">Digital History: A Guide to
                     Gathering, Preserving, and Presenting the Past on the Web</cite>,
                  Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="delanda2006">
                     <!-- close -->DeLanda 2006</span> DeLanda, M., 2006. <cite class="title italic">A New Philosophy of Society: Assemblage Theory and Social
                     Complexity</cite>, London; New York: Continuum.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="denbo2014">
                     <!-- close -->Denbo2014</span> Denbo, S., 2014. Committee on
                  Professional Evaluation of Digital Scholarship by Historians. <cite class="title italic">American Historical Association</cite>. Available at: <a class="ref" href="http://blog.historians.org/2014/01/committee-professional-evaluation-digital-scholarship-historians/" onclick="window.open('http://blog.historians.org/2014/01/committee-professional-evaluation-digital-scholarship-historians/'); return false">http://blog.historians.org/2014/01/committee-professional-evaluation-digital-scholarship-historians/</a>
                  [Accessed September 15, 2014].
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="duff2002">
                     <!-- close -->Duff and Johnson 2002</span> Duff, W.M. &amp; Johnson,
                  C.A., 2002. Accidentally Found on Purpose: Information-Seeking Behavior of
                  Historians in Archives. <cite class="title italic">The Library Quarterly</cite>,
                  72(4), pp.472–496.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="enis2013">
                     <!-- close -->Enis 2013</span> Enis, M., 2013. DPLA Launches, Librarians
                  Respond. <span class="hi italic">The Digital Shift</span>. Available at: <a class="ref" href="http://www.thedigitalshift.com/2013/04/digital-libraries/librarians-respond-to-dpla-launch/" onclick="window.open('http://www.thedigitalshift.com/2013/04/digital-libraries/librarians-respond-to-dpla-launch/'); return false">http://www.thedigitalshift.com/2013/04/digital-libraries/librarians-respond-to-dpla-launch/</a>
                  [Accessed September 15, 2014].
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="fitzpatrick2010">
                     <!-- close -->Fitzpatrick 2010</span> Fitzpatrick, K., 2010.
                  Reporting from the Digital Humanities 2010 Conference. <cite class="title italic">The
                     Chronicle of Higher Education Blogs: ProfHacker</cite>. Available at: <a class="ref" href="http://chronicle.com/blogs/profhacker/reporting-from-the-digital-humanities-2010-conference/25473" onclick="window.open('http://chronicle.com/blogs/profhacker/reporting-from-the-digital-humanities-2010-conference/25473'); return false">http://chronicle.com/blogs/profhacker/reporting-from-the-digital-humanities-2010-conference/25473</a>
                  [Accessed September 15, 2014].
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="fitzpatrick2011">
                     <!-- close -->Fitzpatrick 2011</span> Fitzpatrick, K., 2011.
                  <cite class="title italic">Planned Obsolescence: Publishing, Technology, and the
                     Future of the Academy</cite>, New York: New York University Press.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="flanders2011">
                     <!-- close -->Flanders and Muñoz 2011</span> Flanders, J. &amp;
                  Muñoz, T., 2011. An Introduction to Humanities Data Curation. Available at: <a class="ref" href="http://guide.dhcuration.org/intro/" onclick="window.open('http://guide.dhcuration.org/intro/'); return false">http://guide.dhcuration.org/intro/</a> [Accessed July 2, 2013].
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="gibson1984">
                     <!-- close -->Gibson 1984</span> Gibson, W., 1984. <cite class="title italic">Neuromancer</cite>, New York: Ace Books.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="gourlay2011">
                     <!-- close -->Gourlay 2011</span> Gourlay, L., 2011. Cyborg Literacies
                  and the Posthuman Text. In <cite class="title italic">Workshop on New Media, New
                     Literacies, and New Forms of Learning, December. London, UK. <a class="ref" href="http://blogs.ubc.ca/newliteracies/files/2011/12/Gourlay.pdf" onclick="window.open('http://blogs.ubc.ca/newliteracies/files/2011/12/Gourlay.pdf'); return false">http://blogs.ubc.ca/newliteracies/files/2011/12/Gourlay.pdf</a></cite>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="gray2002">
                     <!-- close -->Gray et al. 2002</span> Gray, J. et al., 2002. Online
                  Scientific Data Curation, Publication, and Archiving. In <cite class="title italic">Astronomical Telescopes and Instrumentation</cite>. pp. 103–107. Available
                  at: <a class="ref" href="http://proceedings.spiedigitallibrary.org/proceeding.aspx?articleid=874929" onclick="window.open('http://proceedings.spiedigitallibrary.org/proceeding.aspx?articleid=874929'); return false">http://proceedings.spiedigitallibrary.org/proceeding.aspx?articleid=874929</a>
                  [Accessed July 12, 2013].
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="dplab">
                     <!-- close -->History-DPLA</span> Digital Public Library of America,
                  History-DPLA. Available at: <a class="ref" href="http://dp.la/info/about/history/" onclick="window.open('http://dp.la/info/about/history/'); return false">http://dp.la/info/about/history/</a> [Accessed September 15,
                  2014b].
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="kirschenbaum2012">
                     <!-- close -->Kirschenbaum 2012</span> Kirschenbaum, M.G., 2012.
                  <cite class="title italic">Mechanisms: New Media and the Forensic
                     Imagination</cite>, Cambridge, Mass.; London: MIT Press.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="kirschenbaum2013">
                     <!-- close -->Kirschenbaum 2013</span> Kirschenbaum, M., 2013.
                  The .txtual Condition: Digital Humanities, Born-Digital Archives, and the Future
                  Literary. <cite class="title italic">Digital Humanities Quarterly</cite>, 7(1).
                  Available at: <a class="ref" href="http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/7/1/000151/000151.html" onclick="window.open('http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/7/1/000151/000151.html'); return false">http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/7/1/000151/000151.html</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="latour1993">
                     <!-- close -->Latour 1993</span> Latour, B., 1993. <cite class="title italic">We Have Never Been Modern</cite>, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
                  Press.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="lee2005">
                     <!-- close -->Lee 2005</span> Lee, H.-L., 2005. The Concept of Collection
                  from the User’s Perspective. <cite class="title italic">The Library</cite>, 75(1).
                  Available at: <a class="ref" href="http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/428693" onclick="window.open('http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/428693'); return false">http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/428693</a> [Accessed July 2,
                  2013].
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="lord2004">
                     <!-- close -->Lord 2004</span> Lord, P. et al., 2004. From Data Deluge to
                  Data Curation. In <span class="hi italic">Proceedings of the UK E-science All Hands
                     Meeting 2004</span>. pp. 371–375. Available at: <a class="ref" href="http://www.allhands.org.uk/2004/proceedings/papers/150.pdf" onclick="window.open('http://www.allhands.org.uk/2004/proceedings/papers/150.pdf'); return false">http://www.allhands.org.uk/2004/proceedings/papers/150.pdf</a> [Accessed
                  July 2, 2013].
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="mla2013">
                     <!-- close -->Modern Language Association 2013</span> Modern Language
                  Association, 2013. Guidelines for Evaluating Work in Digital Humanities and
                  Digital Media. <cite class="title italic">Modern Language Association</cite>.
                  Available at: <a class="ref" href="http://www.mla.org/guidelines_evaluation_digital" onclick="window.open('http://www.mla.org/guidelines_evaluation_digital'); return false">http://www.mla.org/guidelines_evaluation_digital</a> [Accessed September
                  15, 2014].
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="munoz2013">
                     <!-- close -->Munoz 2013</span> Munoz, T., 2013. Data Curation as
                  Publishing for Digital Humanists. In CIC Center for Library Initiatives Annual
                  Conference. Columbus, OH. Available at: <a class="ref" href="http://trevormunoz.com/notebook/2013/05/30/data-curation-as-publishing-for-dh.html" onclick="window.open('http://trevormunoz.com/notebook/2013/05/30/data-curation-as-publishing-for-dh.html'); return false">http://trevormunoz.com/notebook/2013/05/30/data-curation-as-publishing-for-dh.html</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="munoz2013b">
                     <!-- close -->Munoz and Renear 2013</span> Munoz, T. &amp; Renear, A.,
                  2013. Issues in Humanities Data Curation. Available at: <a class="ref" href="http://cirssweb.lis.illinois.edu/paloalto/whitepaper/premeeting/" onclick="window.open('http://cirssweb.lis.illinois.edu/paloalto/whitepaper/premeeting/'); return false">http://cirssweb.lis.illinois.edu/paloalto/whitepaper/premeeting/</a>
                  [Accessed July 2, 2013].
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="neh">
                     <!-- close -->National Endowment for the Humanities</span> National Endowment
                  for the Humanities, Digital Humanities Start-Up Grants. <cite class="title italic">National Endowment for the Humanities</cite>. Available at: <a class="ref" href="http://www.neh.gov/grants/odh/digital-humanities-start-grants" onclick="window.open('http://www.neh.gov/grants/odh/digital-humanities-start-grants'); return false">http://www.neh.gov/grants/odh/digital-humanities-start-grants</a>
                  [Accessed July 12, 2013].
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="palmer2010">
                     <!-- close -->Palmer, Zavalina, and Fenlon 2010</span> Palmer, C.L.,
                  Zavalina, O.L. &amp; Fenlon, K., 2010. Beyond Size and Search: Building
                  Contextual Mass in Digital Aggregations for Scholarly Use. <cite class="title italic">Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and
                     Technology</cite>, 47(1), pp.1–10.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="dplac">
                     <!-- close -->Philosophy-DPLA</span> Digital Public Library of America,
                  Philosophy-DPLA. Available at: <a class="ref" href="http://dp.la/info/developers/codex/policies/philosophy/" onclick="window.open('http://dp.la/info/developers/codex/policies/philosophy/'); return false">http://dp.la/info/developers/codex/policies/philosophy/</a> [Accessed
                  September 15, 2014c].
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="rosenzweig2003">
                     <!-- close -->Rosenzweig 2003</span> Rosenzweig, R., 2003. Scarcity
                  or Abundance? Preserving the Past in a Digital Era. <cite class="title italic">The
                     American Historical Review</cite>, 108(3), pp.735–762.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="salo2011">
                     <!-- close -->Salo 2011</span> Salo, D., 2011. Respect My Praxis. <cite class="title italic">#alt-academy: Alternative Academic Careers</cite>. Available
                  at: <a class="ref" href="http://mediacommons.futureofthebook.org/alt-ac/pieces/respect-my-praxis" onclick="window.open('http://mediacommons.futureofthebook.org/alt-ac/pieces/respect-my-praxis'); return false">http://mediacommons.futureofthebook.org/alt-ac/pieces/respect-my-praxis</a>
                  [Accessed July 11, 2013].
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="serendip2013">
                     <!-- close -->Serendip-o-matic Team 2013</span> Serendip-o-matic
                  Team, 2013. Serendip-o-matic: Let Your Sources Surprise You. <cite class="title italic">Serendip-o-matic</cite>. Available at: <a class="ref" href="http://serendipomatic.org/" onclick="window.open('http://serendipomatic.org/'); return false">http://serendipomatic.org/</a>
                  [Accessed September 15, 2014].
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="svensson2010">
                     <!-- close -->Svensson 2010</span> Svensson, P., 2010. The Landscape
                  of Digital Humanities. <cite class="title italic">Digital Humanities
                     Quarterly</cite>, 004(1).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="unsworth2001">
                     <!-- close -->Unsworth 2001</span> Unsworth, J., 2001. A Master’s
                  Degree in Digital Humanities: Part of the Media Studies Program At The
                  University of Virginia. In Congress of the Social Sciences and Humanities 2001.
                  Québec, Canada.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="vanzundert2012">
                     <!-- close -->Van Zundert 2012</span> Van Zundert, J., 2012. If you
                  build it, will we come? Large Scale Digital Infrastructures as a Dead End for
                  Digital Humanities. <cite class="title italic">Historical Social Research/Historische
                     Sozialforschung</cite>, pp.165–186.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="wachowski1999">
                     <!-- close -->Wachowski 1999</span> Wachowski, A. &amp; Wachowski,
                  L., 1999. <cite class="title italic">The Matrix</cite>,
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="yakel2007">
                     <!-- close -->Yakel 2007</span> Yakel, E., 2007. Digital Curation.
                  <cite class="title italic">OCLC Systems &amp; Services</cite>, 23(4),
                  pp.335–340.
               </div>
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar"><a href="#">Preview</a>  |  <span style="color: grey">XML</span> |  <a href="#" onclick="javascript:window.print();" title="Click for print friendly version">Print Article</a></div>
         </div>
      </div>
   </body>
</html>