<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
      <title>[PREVIEW] DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly: </title>
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_screen.css" media="screen" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_print.css" media="print" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" /><style type="text/css">
        #mainContent {
          float: none;
          padding-top: 2em;
          padding-left: 4em;
          padding-right: 4em;
          margin-left: 225px;
           
        }</style></head>
   <body>
      <div id="mainContent">
         <div class="DHQarticle">
            <div id="pubInfo">Preview<br />Volume 014 Number 4
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar">
               <form id="taporware" action="get">
                  <div><a href="//preview/index.html">Preview</a>
                      | 
                     <a rel="external" href="//vol/14/4/000531.xml">XML</a>
                     
                     | 
                     		   Discuss
                     			(<a href="/dhq/vol/14/4/000531/000531.html#disqus_thread" data-disqus-identifier="000531">
                        				Comments
                        			</a>)
                     
                  </div>
               </form>
            </div>
            
            <div class="DHQheader">
               
               
               
               
               <h1 class="articleTitle lang en">Introduction: Digital Humanities &amp; Colonial
                  Latin American Studies
               </h1>
               
               
               <div class="author"><span style="color: grey">Hannah Alpert-Abrams</span> &lt;<a href="mailto:halperta_at_gmail_dot_com" onclick="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('halperta_at_gmail_dot_com'); return false;" onkeypress="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('halperta_at_gmail_dot_com'); return false;">halperta_at_gmail_dot_com</a>&gt;, Independent Scholar
               </div>
               
               <div class="author"><span style="color: grey">Clayton McCarl</span> &lt;<a href="mailto:clayton_dot_mccarl_at_unf_dot_edu" onclick="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('clayton_dot_mccarl_at_unf_dot_edu'); return false;" onkeypress="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('clayton_dot_mccarl_at_unf_dot_edu'); return false;">clayton_dot_mccarl_at_unf_dot_edu</a>&gt;, University of North Florida
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               <span class="Z3988" title="url_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;rft_val_fmt=info%3Aofi%2Ffmt%3Akev%3Amtx%3Ajournal&amp;rfr_id=info%3Asid%2Fzotero.org%3A2&amp;rft.genre=article&amp;rft.atitle=Introduction%3A%20Digital%20Humanities%20%26%20Colonial%20Latin%20American%20Studies&amp;rft.jtitle=Digital%20Humanities%20Quarterly&amp;rft.stitle=DHQ&amp;rft.issn=1938-4122&amp;rft.date=2020-12-15&amp;rft.volume=014&amp;rft.issue=4&amp;rft.aulast=Alpert-Abrams&amp;rft.aufirst=Hannah&amp;rft.au=Hannah%20Alpert-Abrams&amp;rft.au=Clayton%20McCarl"> </span></div>
            
            
            <div id="DHQtext">
               
               
               
               
               
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p1">1</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p1"><em class="emph">For Linda M. Rodriguez</em></div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p2">2</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p2">This special issue of <cite class="title italic">Digital Humanities Quarterly</cite>
                     examines intersections between colonial Latin American studies
                     (CLAS)<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e210">[1]</a> and digital humanities (DH) theory and practice. The essays
                     collected here touch on matters that pertain to numerous fields, including
                     anthropology, archaeology, art history, history, linguistics, and literature. By
                     doing so in a digital context, they blur the lines between many of these fields,
                     and point to several major themes that predominate across digital humanities
                     scholarship today.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p3">3</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p3">The project was motivated by the recognition of three realities. First, digital
                     practice has become fundamental to how scholarly work is conducted in the study
                     of the colonial world. Second, scholarship being carried out today demonstrates
                     that digital methods have the potential to significantly enhance the field going
                     forward. Third, in order to realize that potential, the diverse community of
                     practitioners engaged in such work needs to better articulate how digital
                     scholarship is conceptualized and conducted within CLAS.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p4">4</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p4">In this introduction, we briefly provide context for understanding the two areas
                     of inquiry at the center of this discussion. To do so, we first consider in
                     broad strokes the central concerns of each, proposing ways we believe the two
                     overlap in terms of objectives and methods. We then step back to examine the
                     evolution of digital work within CLAS, arguing that such scholarship has
                     followed a different path than in digital humanities communities based in the
                     United States and Europe. We propose that legacies of colonialism have shaped
                     this development by obliging scholars to confront material realities and
                     theoretical problems that are often distinct from those that drive digital
                     humanities practice elsewhere.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p5">5</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p5">Working from this premise, we then suggest parameters for identifying a set of
                     tendencies that can define the field we term <span class="hi italic">digital colonial
                        Latin American studies</span> (DCLAS). To do so, we analyze trends in digital
                     scholarship within the field, examining, in particular, how those ideas and
                     concerns inform the articles in this special collection. We conclude by
                     reflecting on the challenges that the broader community of scholars who work on
                     colonial Latin America must face before being able to more fully harness digital
                     methods to transform research and teaching about the colonial world.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Two parallel, overlapping fields</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p6">6</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p6">This project brings together two areas of study that are both broadly and
                     capaciously defined. We offer our working definitions here with the purpose of
                     better orienting readers towards the content of this special issue.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p7">7</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p7">Defining DH in precise terms has long presented a challenge. Certainly, there is
                     a sense in which we are all, as researchers and teachers who use computers,
                     participants in DH, whether we are conducting our research through online
                     databases and search engines, composing scholarly monographs using word
                     processing software, or teaching with digital images or remote learning
                     technologies.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e246">[2]</a> However, for many
                     scholars, and for the purposes of this special issue, this work becomes
                     “digital humanities” when the critical and theoretical
                     apparatus surrounding research, teaching, and publication — which already
                     encompasses disciplinary and cross-disciplinary frameworks — extends to the use
                     of digital technologies.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e252">[3]</a></div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p8">8</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p8">Even calling DH a “field” is problematic, with many asserting
                     that it is better understood as a collection of scholarly tendencies than as
                     clearly defined areas of inquiry. Much work within the digital humanities
                     consists of reflection on those tendencies, and in the sense of such
                     scholarship, DH does exist as a category with its own boundaries. Beyond such
                     work, however, DH is, to a large extent, something that must be done
                     <em class="emph">within</em> other scholarly areas. Put another way, DH is a space in
                     which other scholarly areas can be carried out.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p9">9</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p9">One basic defining tension within DH in recent years has been a struggle for
                     diversity and inclusion. DH as a field of study has been marked by the
                     predominance of European and U.S.-based institutions, scholars, and languages.
                     Uneven access to digital technologies has contributed to this outcome, but other
                     factors are also involved, such as differing levels of institutional support and
                     access to the financing needed to support large-scale DH endeavors. In part to
                     counter this tendency, the global and multilingual movements within DH have
                     worked to make the field more expansive and diverse by actively engaging with
                     questions of access and equity, and by drawing on critical frameworks including
                     feminist and decolonial studies [<a class="ref" href="#burns2020">Burns 2020</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#risam2018">Risam 2018</a>].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p10">10</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p10">Latin America is one of the areas that traditionally has been underrepresented
                     within DH. It is a vast and diverse region in geographical, linguistic,
                     cultural, religious, racial and ethnic terms, as well as in other ways. Scholars
                     of Latin America carry out their work within disciplinary areas across the
                     humanities and social sciences, but many also identify with the broad
                     interdisciplinary field known as Latin American studies (LAS), whose presence is
                     most visibly marked each year by the international congress of the Latin
                     American Studies Association.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p11">11</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p11">CLAS can be understood, if imperfectly, as a chronologically demarcated subfield
                     of LAS. While most scholarly activity within LAS today is concerned with the
                     twentieth and twenty-first centuries, CLAS focuses on the lesser studied period
                     that spans from the arrival of European settlers at various points starting in
                     the fifteenth century to the disruption of European colonial rule in the late
                     eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. CLAS is also set apart by its
                     theoretical and methodological approaches. CLAS shares certain characteristics
                     with LAS more broadly — such as an emphasis on alterity, inequality, and the
                     vindication of historical injustices — and scholars in the field, as in LAS more
                     broadly, engage with interdisciplinary areas including ethnic studies,
                     Indigenous studies, African diasporic studies, and post-colonial and decolonial
                     studies. At the same time, CLAS does so in the context of different historical
                     and cultural realities, working often from distinct types of evidence. Like
                     scholars of the Early Modern period elsewhere, those who work in CLAS rely on
                     primary sources that include notarial records, printed books, correspondence,
                     sacred objects, works of art, artifacts, and archaeological
                     data.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e277">[4]</a></div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p12">12</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p12">Brought together, DH and CLAS represent two areas of scholarly practice that are,
                     in many ways, highly compatible. Both are fundamentally and self-consciously
                     interdisciplinary, thriving on the interaction of scholars across traditional
                     boundaries. Both embrace broad possibilities for engaging with and understanding
                     textual and visual material, as well as historical and geographical processes.
                     DH, like CLAS, places emphasis on rethinking dynamics of power, dismantling
                     outdated stereotypes, and decolonizing knowledge. Important currents in both
                     CLAS and DH have been concerned with the ownership and preservation of cultural
                     heritage, and the accessibility of such material to both academic and general
                     audiences. Scholars in CLAS, as in DH, recognize the need for
                     cross-institutional initiatives and partnerships between researchers, archives,
                     and others.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p13">13</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p13">In what follows, we argue that DH is a particularly propitious space in which
                     scholars of the colonial period can operate, due to the inherent compatibilities
                     we identify here. The experimental nature of digital humanities research can
                     free scholars of the colonial world to formulate new types of questions, and
                     more fully realize the goals of interdisciplinarity and theoretical innovation
                     that underlie the field. Promoting and supporting digital work within the study
                     of the colonial world can also allow us to draw in new types of scholars who can
                     renovate and re-energize the field in ways that we may not be able to envision.
                     
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">The evolution of digital approaches within colonial Latin American
                     studies
                  </h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p14">14</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p14">The digital humanities as practiced within CLAS have followed a unique evolution.
                     In the United States, Canada, and Europe, among other places, DH is generally
                     understood to have emerged out of corpus linguistics, with early practitioners
                     focused on the application of computer technology to conduct systematic analysis
                     of textual material [<a class="ref" href="#jacob2020">Jacob 2020</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#trettien2020">Trettien 2020</a>].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p15">15</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p15">In Latin America, in contrast, the origins of much of today’s digital practice
                     can be traced to the facsimiles, scholarly editions, and recovery projects
                     produced in the region in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. As Mercedes
                     Salómon Salazar references in this special issue, one consequence of colonial
                     rule in the Americas has been the broad dispersal of the primary sources of
                     colonial and pre-Columbian history, from Indigenous texts and works of art to
                     notarial records and printed books. In the wake of independence from European
                     colonial rule, gaining and sharing access to these records became a task of
                     primary importance for scholars based in the Americas [<a class="ref" href="#zamora2004">Zamora 2004</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#alpert2017">Alpert-Abrams 2017</a>].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p16">16</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p16">This led to a proliferation of manual transcriptions, printed editions,
                     photo-reproductions, plaster replicas, dictionaries, and bibliographies, many
                     produced by and for researchers in the Americas and the Caribbean [<a class="ref" href="#bueno2018">Bueno 2018</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#murrieta2020">Murrieta et al. 2020</a>]. These projects were often developed, at great
                     personal expense, with the express intent of correcting for the colonial
                     silencing of the historical record by providing local access to cultural
                     heritage, or in the words of Christina Bueno, as part of “el
                     esfuerzo por fabricar una historia patria en el gran proceso de construcción
                     de la nación”<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e323">[5]</a>
                     [<a class="ref" href="#bueno2018">Bueno 2018</a>, 206]. They drew on new technologies, from
                     plaster casts to photostats and printing presses, to achieve these goals [<a class="ref" href="#mundy1996">Mundy                 and Leibsohn 1996</a>].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p17">17</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p17">The spread of digital technology has accelerated these processes, with
                     consequences for how CLAS is practiced. Projects that were made digital in the
                     1990s and the early 2000s, such as the <cite class="title italic">Vistas</cite>
                     project, the digital edition of Guaman Poma de Ayala’s <cite class="title italic">Nueva corónica y buen gobierno</cite> (2001), and <cite class="title italic">Slave Voyages</cite> (formerly the <cite class="title italic">Trans-Atlantic and
                        Intra-American Slave Trade Database</cite>), all seek to broaden access to
                     historical records and works of art that have been widely dispersed or
                     historically undervalued, while building the scholarly apparatus that enables
                     students and a general public to make meaning out of difficult texts and
                     objects. These projects also point to new challenges introduced by the digital
                     age, including the uneven distribution of access to digital resources across the
                     Americas, the dominance of English and the United States in DH, the undervaluing
                     of digital work at academic institutions, and the difficulty of sustaining
                     digital projects for the long term.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p18">18</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p18">Many of these early projects started on paper or began off-line. Rolena Adorno’s
                     edition of Guaman Poma began as a hand transcription in 1977 and appeared first
                     as a printed volume in 1987, while <cite class="title italic">Slave Voyages</cite>
                     originated as a series of databases designed by individual scholars in the
                     1960s, and <cite class="title italic">Vistas</cite> was first made available on CDRom
                     in 2000 [<a class="ref" href="#adorno2006">Adorno 2006</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#mundy2017">Mundy and Leibsohn 2017</a>]. The traces of that earlier time, and those earlier
                     technologies, are still visible in these projects: in their theoretical
                     frameworks, their thematic organization, their encoding schemas, their use of
                     language, and their interface design. Most visibly, among these early efforts we
                     tend to find projects that are not designed for accessibility or for smartphone
                     use, and that were created by scholars in Europe and the United States without
                     the active participation of Latin American, Black, or Indigenous
                     communities.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p19">19</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p19">Thanks to the visionary work of historians of the African diaspora based in the
                     U.S., Europe, Latin America, and the Caribbean, as well substantial funding from
                     the National Endowment for the Humanities, <cite class="title italic">Slave
                        Voyages</cite> has been able to reinvent itself in recent years as a
                     “digital memorial” to the Africans whose forced labor
                     built our nations.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e370">[6]</a> This reinvention follows the
                     lead of projects that were born digital in the last two decades, laying the
                     groundwork for the new kind of digital colonial Latin American Studies that this
                     special issue aims to explore.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Current trends within digital colonial Latin American studies</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p20">20</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p20">While diverse in terms of materials and methodologies, the work being carried out
                     today within DCLAS is characterized broadly by a set of common features. Much of
                     this work focuses on the recovery of and access to cultural heritage, seeks to
                     uncover hidden narratives and geographies, poses questions about labor and
                     pedagogy, and emphasizes problems of theory and praxis. While these concerns are
                     not unique to DCLAS, the ways they across the field support the idea of a
                     clearly identifiable area of digital practice. This convergence of theoretical
                     and practical concerns across DCLAS is, in many ways, a result of the special
                     circumstances of CLAS and the challenges that scholars face, and indeed, many of
                     the dynamics we outline here are also central to non–digital work within
                     CLAS.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">1. Recovery &amp; Access to Cultural Heritage</h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p21">21</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p21">Recovery projects are initiatives that aim to “locate,
                        preserve and disseminate” historical records that have been
                        devalued, dispersed, and destroyed through historical processes such as
                        colonialism [<a class="ref" href="#recovery2020">Recovery 2020</a>]. These projects depend on
                        cross-organizational and multinational collaboration, and frequently
                        decenter Europe and the United States. They provide access to widely
                        dispersed collections of archival materials while building on new methods
                        for crowdsourced transcription, text encoding, and descriptive metadata that
                        better reflect the ambiguities and linguistic complexities of the colonial
                        period. Within DCLAS, these projects have proliferated so widely that we
                        cannot list them all here: some examples include the <cite class="title italic">Primeros Libros de las Américas</cite>, the <cite class="title italic">Fundación Histórica Neogranadina</cite>, <cite class="title italic">A Colony
                           in Crisis</cite>, <cite class="title italic">Escritos de Mujeres</cite>, and
                        <cite class="title italic">coloniaLab</cite>.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e417">[7]</a></div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p22">22</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p22">Three articles in this special issue address the challenges of recovery work.
                        In her article on the <cite class="title italic">Catálogo Colectivo de Marcas de
                           Fuego</cite>, an index of authorities, Mercedes Isabel Salomón Salazar
                        examines the obstacles faced by digital projects that need to reference
                        bibliographical materials across different institutional systems. She
                        demonstrates the difficulties of standardizing the study of provenance and
                        coordinating a project across organizational and national boundaries. She
                        also illustrates how collaborative recovery projects can lead to the
                        uncovering of histories that were erased by the boundaries of collecting
                        institutions.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p23">23</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p23">George Allen Broadwell et al. address the particular challenges of recovering
                        Indigenous materials in collaboration with scholarly, student, and
                        Indigenous communities. They reflect upon Ticha, a digital text explorer for
                        writings in Colonial Zapotec. They explain how Ticha provides access to
                        little-known archival materials, enabling modern-day speakers of Zapotec to
                        connect with the history of their language and communities. The authors also
                        examine Ticha as a model for partnering with Indigenous stakeholders in the
                        production of knowledge and the design of digital humanities endeavors.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p24">24</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p24">In a similar fashion, Laura Matthew and Michael Bannister consider
                        Nahuatl/Nawat in Central America (NECA), a project focused on recovering and
                        making accessible Nahuan-language texts written during the colonial period
                        in Central America. They explore the reasons for prioritizing this corpus
                        and explain the history of the project and its technical evolution. By
                        looking in part at site analytics, they also analyze the challenges that
                        this project has faced, and formulate a model for moving forward.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p25">25</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p25">We would also like to note here one additional project focused on recovery
                        that we were, in the end, unable to feature in this issue. <cite class="title italic">Digital Aponte</cite> is a project “dedicated to the life and work of José Antonio Aponte, a free man of
                        color, carpenter, artist, and alleged leader of a massive antislavery
                        conspiracy and rebellion in colonial Cuba in 1811-1812.”
                        <cite class="title italic">Digital Aponte</cite> is a creative reimagining of
                        what it means to engage with archival silence; its subject is a lost volume
                        produced by Aponte and recalled through notarial archives from the trial
                        that would end his life [<a class="ref" href="#rodriguez2019">Rodriguez and                 Ferrer 2019</a>]. Linda Rodriguez, the
                        creator of <cite class="title italic">Digital Aponte</cite>, passed away during
                        the process of assembling this project and her contribution to this issue
                        was never completed. Linda’s presence in our community ended too soon, and
                        we dedicate this special issue to her.
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">2. Uncovering hidden narratives and geographies</h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p26">26</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p26">Thinking critically about representations of place and space has been
                        fundamental to CLAS, which has a long history of engaging with and
                        disrupting the interaction between Indigenous boundaries and colonial
                        borders. These areas of study benefit from new digital methodologies, which
                        bring together what Thomas Padilla has named “collections-as-data” with technologies for geospatial
                        representation [<a class="ref" href="#padilla2020">Padilla 2020</a>]. For example, projects like
                        Maria José Afanador Llach’s <cite class="title italic">Mapping Nature in New
                           Granada</cite> and the broadly collaborative <cite class="title italic">Power
                           of Attorney</cite> take advantage of the affordances of digital
                        technology to see history differently, allowing us to engage with historical
                        categories ranging from borders and languages to legal codes and natural
                        resources.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p27">27</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p27">In this special issue, Patricia Murrieta-Flores et al. approach these
                        questions by examining how computational approaches can expedite and
                        facilitate the identification, analysis, and cross-referencing of vast
                        amounts of historical, anthropological, and archaeological information
                        available in sixteenth-century sources. Murrieta-Flores et al. consider the
                        the experiences of the <cite class="title italic">Digging into Early Colonial
                           Mexico</cite> project, which focuses on the analysis of the Relaciones
                        geográficas, a set of responses to a sixteenth-century questionnaire
                        completed for the Spanish Crown by local colonial administrators. Their work
                        demonstrates the potential of these methods to address questions relating to
                        the economy, culture, natural history, and religious practices of New
                        Spain.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p28">28</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p28">Emma Slayton draws on archaeological data about Indigenous Caribbean
                        settlements to model hypothetical canoe routes between Trinidad and the
                        mainland coast of South America, exploring how possible avenues of travel
                        were changed or interrupted during the early colonial period. Her work shows
                        how data-driven analysis can complement the written record to better
                        describe the impact of colonization on Indigenous communities.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p29">29</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p29">By extending beyond the practice of close reading to explore cultural
                        analytics and extratextual evidence, these projects allow us to find new
                        ways of knowing that extend beyond the narrow perspective inscribed in the
                        colonial text. This can allow us to locate new information left out of the
                        historical record, as Slayton writes. It can also, in the words of Murrieta
                        et al., “facilitate the discovery and analysis of
                        geographies not immediately apprehended with normal reading.”
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">3. Labor and Pedagogy</h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p30">30</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p30">Questions surrounding labor and pedagogy — separate categories which are
                        nonetheless closely intertwined — are central to DCLAS. Like the Ticha and
                        Nahuatl/Nawatl projects described by Broadwell et al. and Matthews and
                        Bannister in this issue, much current work in DCLAS involves envisioning new
                        models for accomplishing scholarly work. This often entails imagining ways
                        to achieve more equitable relationships across national boundaries, among
                        scholarly institutions, and with groups that have been historically
                        marginalized within academic settings, including Black and Indigenous
                        scholars, language activists, and knowledge and heritage communities.
                        Examples of such projects would be the digitization of the Fondo Real de
                        Cholula, a collaboration between scholars and librarians at the University
                        of Texas and the Benemérita Universidad Autónoma de Puebla, the digital
                        edition of the Codex Mendoza developed by the Instituto Nacional de
                        Arqueología e Historia (Mexico), <cite class="title italic">Mesolore</cite>, and
                        <cite class="title italic">Musical Passages</cite>.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p31">31</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p31">Current work in digital colonial Latin American Studies pushes us to think
                        critically about what it means to teach about the colonial world in the
                        digital age. Projects like Ticha and coloniaLab involve students as
                        participants or primary collaborators, and include reflection on that
                        student involvement as a central component of their work [<a class="ref" href="#flores2020">Flores-Marcial 2020</a>]
                        [<a class="ref" href="#lillenhaugen2020">Lillehaugen 2020</a>]
                        [<a class="ref" href="#mccarl2020">McCarl et al. 2020</a>]
                        [<a class="ref" href="#palacios2020">Palacios 2020</a>]. Other projects deploy technology to provide
                        new learning opportunities for those who do not have access to attend
                        in-person classes related to the colonial world. Two examples are <cite class="title italic">Chqeta’maj le qach’ab’al k’iche’</cite>, a
                        language-learning resource for K’iche’ Maya, and <cite class="title italic">Programming Historian en Español</cite>, which offers free training
                        resources in digital humanities for researchers working in multiple
                        languages. As we write this introduction from our home-offices (or our
                        kitchen tables) while under stay-at-home orders during the coronavirus
                        pandemic, the importance of these resources and the critical apparatus that
                        informs them are at the forefront of our minds.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p32">32</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p32">In this special issue, Lauren G. Kilroy-Ewbank explores the merits and
                        drawbacks of using digital visual materials, both scholarly and
                        pedagogically, for understanding and analyzing colonial Latin American art.
                        She demonstrates how instructors can use digital methods in teaching to
                        reveal how “the digital frames or reframes our
                        understanding of visual culture and to effectively critique it.”
                        In one example, Kilroy-Ewbank discusses how an active role in the creation
                        of metadata — a process often overlooked or regarded as acritical — can
                        alter students’ understanding of the objects we study and the biases
                        inherent in scholarly work.
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">4. Theory &amp; Praxis</h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p33">33</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p33">One commonality across projects in DCLAS, as is often the case in DH
                        more generally, is an attention to the bringing together of theory and
                        practice. <cite class="title italic">Slavery in the Machine</cite>, the third
                        issue of the <cite class="title italic">Archipelagos</cite> journal of digital
                        Caribbean studies, is a model for the breadth of theoretical possibility in
                        colonial DH [<a class="ref" href="#johnson2019">Johnson 2019</a>]. The work represented in that
                        issue, much of which draws on the history of colonization and enslavement,
                        envisions and implements a digital humanities based in a theoretical space
                        of movement and change, a Caribbean that “won’t stand
                        still” or an <span class="foreign i">isla que se repite</span>
                        [<a class="ref" href="#glover2019">Glover and Gil 2019</a>]. In this framework, experimentation exists
                        alongside critique, silence alongside voicing, and mourning alongside
                        rebirth.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p34">34</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p34">Similarly, in their survey of digital research on visual culture in Spanish
                        America, Barbara Mundy and Dana Leibsohn describe a field of scholarship
                        that reconfigures ways of knowing, seeing, and working together, even as it
                        works with and through digital tools [<a class="ref" href="#mundy2017">Mundy and Leibsohn 2017</a>]. As Maria
                        José Afanador Llach writes, in the digital humanities “nos enfrentamos a procesos de producción de conocimiento mediados por
                        el pensamiento computacional, el software y las interfaces
                        digitales”
                        <a class="noteRef" href="#d4e560">[8]</a>
                        [<a class="ref" href="#afanador2019">Afanador Llach 2019</a>]. Even as colonial digital humanists build
                        tools and platforms, digitize documents, enter metadata, and design
                        websites, they work to understand the alignment between the tools we use,
                        the things we see, and the knowledge that we make possible. This can involve
                        not just thinking critically about digital tools and their interaction with
                        social and cultural factors of colonial and post-colonial communities, but
                        also investing in the construction of new technologies that better reflect
                        scholarly values [<a class="ref" href="#alpert2016">Alpert-Abrams 2016</a>]
                        [<a class="ref" href="#alpert2017">Alpert-Abrams 2017</a>].
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p35">35</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p35">The questions of theory and praxis that emerge from the articles in this
                        special issue open new ways of theorizing DCLAS. These largely collaborative
                        projects aim to produce “transformative work” by way of
                        an iterative process conducted “through an ongoing
                        conversation with user communities”
                        [<a class="ref" href="#matthew2020">Matthew and Bannister 2020</a>]. As Matthew and
                        Bannister write in this issue, this introduces a “paradigmatic
                        change” in how scholars work together, with far-reaching
                        consequences for knowledge production in and beyond the academy. They open
                        the possibility, in the words of Broadwell et al., for a form of digital
                        humanities that “democratize[s] access to materials and
                        resources.” As Matthew and Bannister add, however, these projects
                        also introduce new problems as we think through their relationship with
                        colonial and neoliberal politics, the technology industry, and institutions
                        of higher education in the United States and Latin America.
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">Looking forward</h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p36">36</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p36">This collection points to various possibilities for CLAS. The articles
                        gathered here illustrate ways that digital scholarship can provide new
                        pathways to conducting scholarship in a collaborative fashion. They suggest
                        innovative means for representing the heterogeneous and incomplete nature of
                        the colonial archive. They demonstrate how the curation of colonial data
                        sets can enable new ways of understanding Latin American history. Likewise,
                        they show how digital pedagogy, or critical approaches to the selective use
                        of digital tools and resources in teaching and learning, offers new ways for
                        students to engage with colonial material and textual history.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p37">37</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p37">This is not to say that DCLAS does not continue to face challenges, many of
                        them made explicit by this special issue, both through its content and the
                        circumstance surrounding its publication. Foremost among these challenges
                        are issues related to peer review, the precarious professional circumstances
                        of many within DCLAS, as well as the need we face, as a field, to think
                        critically about how we engage digitally with colonial-era materials.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p38">38</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p38">Like many scholarly projects, this special issue faced significant challenges
                        during the process of peer review. We originally intended to publish these
                        pieces in a more traditional humanities journal, but after careful
                        consideration, the editors determined that review and revision of these
                        project- and pedagogy-oriented initiatives was too far out of scope of that
                        publication. This problem was exacerbated by the professional diversity of
                        those involved, who include not only research/teaching faculty, but also
                        faculty members, librarians, programmers, students, and language activists —
                        voices not often included in many conventional humanities forums. A DH
                        journal turned out to be a more appropriate home, but identifying reviewers
                        who could speak to these articles as work sitting at the intersection of DH
                        and CLAS proved to be another challenge.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p39">39</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p39">All of these circumstances reflect the broader difficulty that digital
                        humanists have in demonstrating the value of their work, with real
                        consequences for hiring, tenure, and promotion, as well as for the
                        sustainability of projects themselves. Such dynamics play out in CLAS in
                        ways that are common across the humanities, with many of the scholars who
                        are engaged in digital work within CLAS not emerging from, or entirely
                        identifying with, the disciplinary routes that traditionally have fed into
                        the field. As a consequence, such scholars do not have a clear path into a
                        professional existence within the very area of inquiry that they are best
                        positioned to help transform. Higher education in the United States and many
                        other parts of the world continues to rely for administrative purposes on
                        the notions of disciplines, and many scholars themselves, particularly in
                        the face of financial cuts to vulnerable areas, defend such disciplinary
                        lines. In an extremely tight job market, those who might identify
                        first-and-foremost as practitioners of DCLAS face a difficult challenge in
                        selling their broadly focused skills to disciplinary departments who are
                        often searching for candidates with more traditional profiles who can teach
                        more conventional coursework. The lines that have long separated
                        librarianship from the labor of research/teaching faculty exacerbate the
                        problem, as practitioners of DCLAS might naturally fit into a professional
                        sphere that could span both areas, but at the present, that space is
                        extremely limited.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p40">40</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p40">On a conceptual level, practitioners of DCLAS face a need to imagine the
                        common questions that should be asked about how we interact digitally with
                        colonial-era objects. This is a topic that arose during a panel at DH2018 in
                        Mexico City, and was one of the objectives of the first meeting of the
                        Association for Digital Research in Early Latin America (ADRELA), held at
                        the annual congress of the Latin American Studies Association in Boston the
                        following year.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e611">[9]</a> As was discussed at both
                        events, a shared protocol might be not only of a logistical nature, but also
                        have ethical implications, helping us to consider the assumptions behind our
                        tools and their conceptual models that might distort our work in ways we do
                        not realize. Such questions might also address the ways that our own
                        assumptions — as specific people working in specific contexts — do the same.
                        
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">Conclusion</h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p41">41</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p41">In gathering together the articles in this collection, we seek to advance the
                        emerging conversation about the role of digital scholarship within CLAS and
                        contribute to the formation of a more coherent digital humanities community
                        in the field. We also seek to understand how articles like those collected
                        here help CLAS connect with larger conversations about scholarship in the
                        twenty-first century, and consider how digital methods can expand the ways
                        we study, understand, and interact with the colonial period in Latin
                        America. Perhaps most importantly, we hope to emphasize DH as a point of
                        entry for a new generation of scholars in our field, which — like DH itself
                        — is inherently interdisciplinary, and built upon an enthusiasm for
                        innovation and collaboration.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p42">42</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p42">Much of the work in this special issue has been touched by local and global
                        crises, including climate change, the coronavirus pandemic, U.S. immigration
                        policy, and the defunding of humanities programs at academic institutions in
                        the United States. During the three years that this collection was
                        developed, contributors were directly and indirectly impacted by multiple
                        health crises, wildfires, travel bans, and campus closures, while one editor
                        of this volume no longer works in academia. These events draw attention to
                        the precarious conditions of our histories, our communities, and our
                        industries, even as they make the values of openness, access, collaboration,
                        and virtual connection that underlie these projects more essential than
                        ever. Likewise, in the current moment of instability, crisis, and
                        misinformation, the value of using digital technologies to preserve and
                        provide access to culture has never been greater, particularly when those
                        tools can empower us to recover stories that have been lost or erased.
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Digital Projects Referenced in this Introduction</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p43">43</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p43">
                     <cite class="title italic">Catálogo Colectivo
                        de Marcas de Fuego</cite>. Mercedes Salomón and Adrian Mendoza Leal. <a href="http://www.marcasdefuego.buap.mx/" onclick="window.open('http://www.marcasdefuego.buap.mx/'); return false" class="ref">http://www.marcasdefuego.buap.mx</a>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p44">44</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p44">
                     <cite class="title italic">Chqeta’maj le qach’ab’al k’iche’</cite>. Sergio Romero, Ignacio Carvajal, Mareike Sattler, Juan Manuel Tahay Tzaj, Carl
                     Blyth, Sarah Sweeney, Pat Kyle, Nathalie Steinfeld Childre. <a href="https://tzij.coerll.utexas.edu/" onclick="window.open('https://tzij.coerll.utexas.edu/'); return false" class="ref">https://tzij.coerll.utexas.edu</a>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p45">45</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p45">
                     <cite class="title italic">Codex Mendoza</cite>. Frances Berdan, Baltazar Brito, Peter Stokes, Ernesto Miranda Trigueros,
                     Noemí Cadena Corona, Verónica Lerma Hernández, and Gerardo Gutiérrez. <a href="https://codicemendoza.inah.gob.mx/index.php" onclick="window.open('https://codicemendoza.inah.gob.mx/index.php'); return false" class="ref">https://codicemendoza.inah.gob.mx/index.php</a>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p46">46</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p46">
                     <cite class="title italic">Colección Digital Fondo Real de Cholula</cite>. LLILAS Benson Latin American Studies and Collections. <a href="https://ladi.lib.utexas.edu/" onclick="window.open('https://ladi.lib.utexas.edu/'); return false" class="ref">https://ladi.lib.utexas.edu.</a>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p47">47</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p47">
                     <cite class="title italic">Colección Escritos de Mujeres Novohispanas</cite>. Clara Ramírez and Claudia Llanos. <a href="https://publicacionesdigitalesunamiisue.wordpress.com/escritos-mujeres/" onclick="window.open('https://publicacionesdigitalesunamiisue.wordpress.com/escritos-mujeres/'); return false" class="ref">https://publicacionesdigitalesunamiisue.wordpress.com/escritos-mujeres</a>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p48">48</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p48">
                     <cite class="title italic">coloniaLab</cite>. Clayton McCarl and collaborators. <a href="https://colonialab.org/" onclick="window.open('https://colonialab.org/'); return false" class="ref">https://colonialab.org</a>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p49">49</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p49">
                     
                     <cite class="title italic">A Colony in Crisis</cite>. Abbey R. Broughton, Kelsey Corlett-Rivera, Nathan H. Dize, Brittany de Gail,
                     Laurence Jay-Rayon Ibrahim Aibo, Pierre Malbranche, Daphney Vastey. <a href="https://colonyincrisis.lib.umd.edu/" onclick="window.open('https://colonyincrisis.lib.umd.edu/'); return false" class="ref">https://colonyincrisis.lib.umd.edu</a>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p50">50</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p50">
                     <cite class="title italic">Digging into Early Colonial
                        Mexico</cite>. Patricia Murrieta-Flores, Ian Gregory, Bruno Martins, Diego Jiménez
                     Baldillo and teams. <a href="https://www.lancaster.ac.uk/digging-ecm/" onclick="window.open('https://www.lancaster.ac.uk/digging-ecm/'); return false" class="ref">https://www.lancaster.ac.uk/digging-ecm</a>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p51">51</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p51">
                     
                     <cite class="title italic">Fundación Histórica
                        Neogranadina</cite>. Juan Fernando Cobo Betancourt, Santiago Muñoz Arbeláez, Natalie Cobo,
                     Adraína Soto Segura. <a href="https://neogranadina.org/" onclick="window.open('https://neogranadina.org/'); return false" class="ref">https://neogranadina.org</a>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p52">52</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p52">
                     <cite class="title italic">Mapping Nature in New Granada.</cite>
                     María José Afanador Llach. Forthcoming.
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p53">53</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p53">
                     <cite class="title italic">Mesolore</cite>. Liza Bakewell and Byron Hamann. <a href="http://www.mesolore.org/" onclick="window.open('http://www.mesolore.org/'); return false" class="ref">http://www.mesolore.org</a>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p54">54</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p54">
                     <cite class="title italic">Musical Passage: A Voyage to 1688 Jamaica</cite>. Laurent Dubois, David K. Garner, Mary Caton Lingold. <a href="http://www.musicalpassage.org/" onclick="window.open('http://www.musicalpassage.org/'); return false" class="ref">http://www.musicalpassage.org</a>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p55">55</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p55">
                     <cite class="title italic">Nahuatl/Nawat</cite>. Laura E. Matthew, Michael Bannister, and Héctor Concohá Chet. <a href="https://nahuatl-nawat.org/" onclick="window.open('https://nahuatl-nawat.org/'); return false" class="ref">https://nahuatl-nawat.org</a>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p56">56</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p56">
                     <cite class="title italic">Primeros Libros de las
                        Américas</cite>. LLILAS Benson Latin American Studies and Collections, Cushing Memorial
                     Library, Biblioteca Histórica José María Lafragua, Biblioteca Franciscana,
                     Biblioteca Palafoxiana. <a href="http://primeroslibros.org/" onclick="window.open('http://primeroslibros.org/'); return false" class="ref">http://primeroslibros.org</a>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p57">57</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p57">
                     <cite class="title italic">Programming
                        Historian en Español</cite>. María José Afanador-Llach, Victor Gayol, Silvia
                     Gutierrez de la Torre, Jennifer Isasi, José Antonio Motilla, Joshua G. Ortiz
                     Baco, Riva Quiroga, Antonio Rojas Castro. <a href="https://programminghistorian.org/es/" onclick="window.open('https://programminghistorian.org/es/'); return false" class="ref">https://programminghistorian.org/es</a>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p58">58</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p58"> 
                     
                     <cite class="title italic">Slave Voyages</cite>. Emory Center for Digital Scholarship and collaborators. <a href="https://www.slavevoyages.org" onclick="window.open('https://www.slavevoyages.org'); return false" class="ref">https://www.slavevoyages.org</a>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p59">59</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p59">
                     <cite class="title italic">Ticha</cite>. Brook Danielle Lillehaugen, George Aaron Broadwell, Michel R. Oudijk, Laurie
                     Allen, Mike Zarafonetis, Xóchitl Flores-Marcial, Moises García Guzmán, Felipe
                     López and team. <a href="https://ticha.haverford.edu/" onclick="window.open('https://ticha.haverford.edu/'); return false" class="ref">https://ticha.haverford.edu</a>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p60">60</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p60">
                     <cite class="title italic">Power of Attorney</cite>. Yanna Yannakakis and team. <a href="https://www.powerofattorneynative.com/" onclick="window.open('https://www.powerofattorneynative.com/'); return false" class="ref">https://www.powerofattorneynative.com</a>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
               
            </div>
            
            <div id="notes">
               <h2>Notes</h2>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e210"><span class="noteRef lang en">[1] Though the abbreviation <em class="emph">CLAS</em> is not widely used, we
                     employ it for the sake of brevity, in parallel with the more common use of
                     <em class="emph">DH</em>. Below we introduce another abbreviation,
                     <em class="emph">DCLAS</em>, to designate the intersection of these two
                     fields.</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e246"><span class="noteRef lang en">[2] For a discussion of general problems in working with
                     digital sources, see Putnam 2016 and Daut 2019.</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e252"><span class="noteRef lang en">[3] For some recent volumes that survey the current
                     state of DH, see Crompton et al. 2016, Balkun and Deyrup 2020, and Crompton
                     et al. 2020.</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e277"><span class="noteRef lang en">[4] Scholarship aimed at defining CLAS as a field is perhaps not
                     abundant, but certainly over the last two decades, scholars have raised
                     questions about the need to revisit or expand the critical lenses that
                     practitioners of CLAS employ. See, for instance, <a href="#bolanos2002">Bolãnos and Verdesio 2002</a>, <a href="#adorno2009">Adorno
                        2009</a>, <a href="#diaz2014">Díaz 2014</a>.</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e323"><span class="noteRef lang en">[5] “The effort to create a
                     history of the homeland in the great process of constructing the
                     nation.” Translation ours.</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e370"><span class="noteRef lang en">[6] For the history of the project and this reformulation,
                     see <a href="#emory2020a">Emory Center 2020a</a>, <a href="#emory2020b">2020b</a>.</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e417"><span class="noteRef lang en">[7] There are too many
                     projects of this kind to list comprehensively here; for a more complete
                     list of digital projects and collections relating to colonial Latin
                     American Studies, we refer you to the crowdsourced bibliography of Latin
                     American DH: <a href="https://docs.google.com/document/d/1JE5s77JETxUC6Qx_ZOd7aiRxfr2WBPNDweTemJGcYT8/edit#" onclick="window.open('https://docs.google.com/document/d/1JE5s77JETxUC6Qx_ZOd7aiRxfr2WBPNDweTemJGcYT8/edit#'); return false" class="ref">https://docs.google.com/document/d/1JE5s77JETxUC6Qx_ZOd7aiRxfr2WBPNDweTemJGcYT8/edit#</a>.</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e560"><span class="noteRef lang en">[8] “We are faced with processes of knowledge
                     construction mediated by computational thinking, software, and
                     digital interfaces.” Translation ours.</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e611"><span class="noteRef lang en">[9] Those conversations — which brought together scholars
                     from across the United States, Europe, and Latin America — inform all of
                     the work in this introduction. For more information about both, see the
                     “Events” page of the ADRELA website (<a href="https://adrela.net/events" onclick="window.open('https://adrela.net/events'); return false" class="ref">https://adrela.net/events</a>).</span></div>
            </div>
            <div id="worksCited">
               <h2>Works Cited</h2>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="adorno2006">
                     <!-- close -->Adorno 2006</span> Adorno, Rolena. “About the transcription and its critical apparatus”
                  <cite class="title italic">The Guaman Poma Website</cite>. Det Kongelige Bibliotek.
                  2006. <a href="http://www5.kb.dk/permalink/2006/poma/info/en/foreword.htm" onclick="window.open('http://www5.kb.dk/permalink/2006/poma/info/en/foreword.htm'); return false" class="ref">http://www5.kb.dk/permalink/2006/poma/info/en/foreword.htm</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="adorno2009">
                     <!-- close -->Adorno 2009</span> Adorno, Rolena. “1989–2009: Revising Colonial Latin American Studies’ ‘New
                  Paradigm’”. Modern Language Association Conference, 27-30 December
                  2009, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="afanador2019">
                     <!-- close -->Afanador Llach 2019</span> Afanador Llach, María José.
                  “Tecnología al servicio de las Humanidades.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Telos</cite>. 11 Dec. 2019. <a href="https://telos.fundaciontelefonica.com/telos-112-cuaderno-central-humanidades-en-un-mundo-stem-maria-jose-afanadortecnologia-al-servicio-de-las-humanidades/" onclick="window.open('https://telos.fundaciontelefonica.com/telos-112-cuaderno-central-humanidades-en-un-mundo-stem-maria-jose-afanadortecnologia-al-servicio-de-las-humanidades/'); return false" class="ref">
                     https://telos.fundaciontelefonica.com/telos-112-cuaderno-central-humanidades-en-un-mundo-stem-maria-jose-afanadortecnologia-al-servicio-de-las-humanidades/</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="alpert2016">
                     <!-- close -->Alpert-Abrams 2016</span> Alpert-Abrams, Hannah. “Machine Reading the Primeros Libros.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Digital Humanities Quarterly</cite> 10.4 (2016). <a href="http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/10/4/000268/000268.html" onclick="window.open('http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/10/4/000268/000268.html'); return false" class="ref">http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/10/4/000268/000268.html</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="alpert2017">
                     <!-- close -->Alpert-Abrams 2017</span> Alpert-Abrams, Hannah. <cite class="title italic">Unreadable Books: Colonial Mexican Documents in
                     Circulation</cite>. 2017. University of Texas, PhD Dissertation.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="alpert2018">
                     <!-- close -->Alpert-Abrams 2018</span> Alpert-Abrams, Hannah. “Colonial Copying in an Imperial Age.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Catalyst</cite> 4.2 (2018). <a href="https://link.gale.com/apps/doc/A561685883/AONE?u=21246_dol&amp;sid=AONE&amp;xid=2c6e866b" onclick="window.open('https://link.gale.com/apps/doc/A561685883/AONE?u=21246_dol&amp;sid=AONE&amp;xid=2c6e866b'); return false" class="ref">https://link.gale.com/apps/doc/A561685883/AONE?u=21246_dol&amp;sid=AONE&amp;xid=2c6e866b</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="balkun2020">
                     <!-- close -->Balkun and Deyrup 2020</span> Balkun, Mary McAleer, and
                  Marta Mestrovic Deyrup. <cite class="title italic">Transformative Digital Humanities:
                     Challenges and Opportunities</cite>. Routledge, 2020. <a href="https://www.taylorfrancis.com/books/9780429399923" onclick="window.open('https://www.taylorfrancis.com/books/9780429399923'); return false" class="ref">https://www.taylorfrancis.com/books/9780429399923</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="bolanos2002">
                     <!-- close -->Bolãnos and                 Verdesio 2002</span> Bolãnos. Alvaro F́elix, and Gustavo Verdesio, eds. “Colonialism Past and Present : Reading and Writing About Colonial Latin
                  America Today.” Albany, NY: SUNY Press, 2002.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="bueno2018">
                     <!-- close -->Bueno 2018</span> Bueno, Christina. “La Biblioteca Nacional de Antropología e Historia de México: un legado del
                  nacionalismo porfiriano.” In Carlos Aguirre and Ricardo D. Salvatore,
                  <cite class="title italic">Bibliotecas y cultura letrada en América Latina: siglos
                     XIX y XX.</cite> Lima: Pontificia Universidad Católica, Fondo Editorial,
                  2018. 205-225.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="burns2020">
                     <!-- close -->Burns 2020</span> Burns, Patrick and Quinn Dombrowski.
                  “Language is not a Default Setting: Countering Digital
                  Humanities’ English Problem.” Matthew Gold and Lauren Klein, eds.
                  <cite class="title italic">Debates in the Digital Humanities</cite> 2021.
                  University of Minnesota Press. <em class="emph">Forthcoming</em>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="crompton2016">
                     <!-- close -->Crompton et al. 2016</span> Crompton, Constance Louise
                  Kathleen, Richard J. Lane, and Raymond George Siemens. 2016. <cite class="title italic">Doing Digital Humanities: Practice, Training,
                     Research</cite>. Routledge, 2016.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="crompton2020">
                     <!-- close -->Crompton et al. 2020</span> Crompton, Constance,
                  Richard J. Lane, and Raymond George Siemens. <cite class="title italic">Doing More
                     Digital Humanities: Open Approaches to Creation, Growth, and
                     Development</cite>. Routledge, 2020.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="daut2019">
                     <!-- close -->Daut 2019</span> Daut, Marlene. “Haiti
                  @ the Digital Crossroads: Archiving Black Sovereignty.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Archipelagos</cite> 3 (2019).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="dombrowski2020">
                     <!-- close -->Dombrowski 2020</span> Dombrowski, Quinn. “The Stakes of Multilingual DH in the United States.”
                  <cite class="title italic">quinndombrowski.com</cite>. March 13, 2020.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="diaz2014">
                     <!-- close -->Díaz 2014</span> Díaz, Mónica. “El
                  ‘nuevo paradigma’ de los estudios coloniales
                  latinoamericanos,”
                  <cite class="title italic">Revista de Estudios Hispánicos</cite> 48:3 (2014):
                  519–47.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="emory2020a">
                     <!-- close -->Emory Center                     2020a</span> Emory
                  Center for Digital Scholarship and collaborators. “About the
                  Project.”
                  <a href="https://www.slavevoyages.org/about/about#" onclick="window.open('https://www.slavevoyages.org/about/about#'); return false" class="ref">https://www.slavevoyages.org/about/about#</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="emory2020b">
                     <!-- close -->Emory Center 2020b</span> Emory Center for Digital
                  Scholarship and collaborators. “History of the
                  Project.”
                  <a href="https://www.slavevoyages.org/about/about#history/1/en/" onclick="window.open('https://www.slavevoyages.org/about/about#history/1/en/'); return false" class="ref">https://www.slavevoyages.org/about/about#history/1/en/</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="flores2020">
                     <!-- close -->Flores-Marcial 2020</span> Flores-Marcial, Xóchitl.
                  “Zapotec-Language Use in Social Media Platforms as a
                  Pedagogical Method for Undergraduate Students.” Presentation at
                  Virtual Conference of the Latin American Studies Association, May 16,
                  2020.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="glover2019">
                     <!-- close -->Glover and Gil 2019</span> Glover, Kaiama and Alex Gil.
                  “The Caribbean Won't Stand Still.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Archipelagos</cite> 3 (2019).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="jacob2020">
                     <!-- close -->Jacob 2020</span>  Jacob, Arun. "Punching Holes in the
                  International Busa Machine Narrative." IDEAH 1.1 (May 30, 2020). <a href="https://assets.pubpub.org/cjsnqq1f/2701f4a8-ef0f-4b40-a86a-b6f520c35270.pdf" onclick="window.open('https://assets.pubpub.org/cjsnqq1f/2701f4a8-ef0f-4b40-a86a-b6f520c35270.pdf'); return false" class="ref">doi: 10.21428/f1f23564.d7d097c2</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="johnson2019">
                     <!-- close -->Johnson 2019</span> Johnson, Jessica Marie. “We Are Deathless (Slavery in the Machine).”
                  <cite class="title italic">Archipelagos</cite> 3 (2019).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="lillenhaugen2020">
                     <!-- close -->Lillehaugen 2020</span> Lillehaugen, Brook. “TEI Encoding and the Creation of Digital Editions of
                  Zapotec-Language Texts in an Undergraduate Classroom.” Presentation
                  at Virtual Conference of the Latin American Studies Association, May 16,
                  2020.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="matthew2020">
                     <!-- close -->Matthew and Bannister 2020</span> Matthew, Laura and Michael
                  Bannister. “The Form of the Content: The Digital Archive
                  Nahuatl/Nawat in Central America”
                  <cite class="title italic">Digital Humanities Quarterly</cite>
                  <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/4/000491/000491.xml" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/4/000491/000491.xml'); return false" class="ref">http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/4/000491/000491.xml</a></div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="mccarl2020">
                     <!-- close -->McCarl et al. 2020</span> McCarl, Clayton, Amarilys
                  Sánchez and Emilia Thom. “Reevaluating the History of
                  Africans and their Descendants in Antioquia, Colombia, through a
                  Digital-Editing-on-Site Study Abroad Experience.” Presentation at
                  Virtual Conference of the Latin American Studies Association, May 16,
                  2020.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="mundy1996">
                     <!-- close -->Mundy                 and Leibsohn 1996</span> Mundy,
                  Barbara and Dana Leibsohn. “Of Copies, Casts, and Codices:
                  Mexico on Display in 1892.”
                  <cite class="title italic">RES: Anthropology and Aesthetics</cite>, no. 29/30 (April
                  01, 1996): 326-43.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="mundy2017">
                     <!-- close -->Mundy and Leibsohn 2017</span> Mundy, B., &amp; Leibsohn,
                  D. “Digital Resources: The State of Digital Research on the
                  Visual Culture of Spanish America.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Latin American
                     History</cite>. 2017. <a href="https://doi.org/10.1093/acrefore/9780199366439.013.117" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.1093/acrefore/9780199366439.013.117'); return false" class="ref">DOI:
                     10.1093/acrefore/9780199366439.013.117</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="murrieta2020">
                     <!-- close -->Murrieta et al. 2020</span> Murrieta-Flores, Patricia et al. “Developing Geographically Oriented NLP Approaches to
                  Sixteenth–Century Historical Documents: Digging into Early Colonial
                  Mexico.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Digital Humanities Quarterly</cite>
                  <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/4/000490/000490.xml" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/4/000490/000490.xml'); return false" class="ref">http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/4/000490/000490.xml</a></div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="padilla2020">
                     <!-- close -->Padilla 2020</span> Padilla, Thomas. “Always Already Computational: Collections as Data.”
                  <a href="https://collectionsasdata.github.io/" onclick="window.open('https://collectionsasdata.github.io/'); return false" class="ref">https://collectionsasdata.github.io/</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="palacios2020">
                     <!-- close -->Palacios 2020</span> Palacios, Albert A. “From the Colonial Page: Introducing DH through
                  Transcription.” Virtual Conference of the Latin American Studies
                  Association, May 16, 2020.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="putnam2016">
                     <!-- close -->Putnam 2016</span> Putnam, Lara. “The
                  Transnational and the Text-Searchable: Digitized Sources and the Shadows
                  They Cast.”
                  <cite class="title italic">The American Historical Review</cite>, 121.2, April 2016.
                  377–402. <a href="https://doi.org/10.1093/ahr/121.2.377" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.1093/ahr/121.2.377'); return false" class="ref">https://doi.org/10.1093/ahr/121.2.377</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="recovery2020">
                     <!-- close -->Recovery 2020</span> “Recovering
                  the US Hispanic Literary Heritage.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Arte Publico Press</cite> 2020. <a href="https://artepublicopress.com/recovery-program/" onclick="window.open('https://artepublicopress.com/recovery-program/'); return false" class="ref">https://artepublicopress.com/recovery-program/</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="risam2018">
                     <!-- close -->Risam 2018</span> Risam, Roopika. <cite class="title italic">New
                     Digital Worlds.</cite> Chicago: Northwestern University Press, 2018.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="rodriguez2019">
                     <!-- close -->Rodriguez and                 Ferrer 2019</span> “Collaborating with Aponte: Digital Humanities, Art,
                  and the Archive.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Archipelagos</cite> 3 (2019).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="trettien2020">
                     <!-- close -->Trettien 2020</span> Trettien, Whitney. “A Hornbook for Digital Book History with Whitney
                  Trettien.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Rare Book School</cite>. YouTube.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="zamora2004">
                     <!-- close -->Zamora 2004</span> De Zamora, Rosa María Fernández.
                  “Hacia un mundo visible del patrimonio bibliográfico
                  mexicano: Retos y acciones que las bibliotecas deben alcanzar.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Encuentro Nacional de Bibliotecas con Fondos
                     Antiguos</cite> (2004).
               </div>
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar"><a href="#">Preview</a>  |  <span style="color: grey">XML</span> |  <a href="#" onclick="javascript:window.print();" title="Click for print friendly version">Print Article</a></div>
         </div>
      </div>
   </body>
</html>