<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
      <title>[PREVIEW] DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly: </title>
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_screen.css" media="screen" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_print.css" media="print" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <style type="text/css">
        #mainContent {
          float: none;
          padding-top: 2em;
          padding-left: 4em;
          padding-right: 4em;
          margin-left: 225px;
           
        }</style>
   </head>
   <body>
      <div id="mainContent">
         <div class="DHQarticle">
            <div id="pubInfo">Preview<br />Volume  Number </div>
            <div class="toolbar"><a href="#">Preview</a>  |  <span style="color: grey">XML</span> |  <a href="#" onclick="javascript:window.print();" title="Click for print friendly version">Print Article</a></div>
            
            <div class="DHQheader">
               
               
               
               
               <h1 class="articleTitle lang en">Lost Spaces, Lost
                  Technologies, and Lost People: Online History Projects Seek to Recover LGBTQ+ Spatial
                  Histories</h1>
               
               
               <div class="author"><span style="color: grey">Alex Ketchum
                     </span> &lt;<a href="mailto:alexandraketchum_at_gmail_dot_com" onclick="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('alexandraketchum_at_gmail_dot_com'); return false;" onkeypress="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('alexandraketchum_at_gmail_dot_com'); return false;">alexandraketchum_at_gmail_dot_com</a>&gt;, McGill University</div>
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               <span class="Z3988" title="url_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;rft_val_fmt=info%3Aofi%2Ffmt%3Akev%3Amtx%3Ajournal&amp;rfr_id=info%3Asid%2Fzotero.org%3A2&amp;rft.genre=article&amp;rft.atitle=Lost%20Spaces,%20Lost%20Technologies,%20and%20Lost%20People%3A%20Online%20History%20Projects%20Seek%20to%20Recover%20LGBTQ%2B%20Spatial%20Histories&amp;rft.jtitle=Digital%20Humanities%20Quarterly&amp;rft.stitle=DHQ&amp;rft.issn=1938-4122&amp;rft.date=&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.aulast=Ketchum&amp;rft.aufirst=Alex&amp;rft.au=Alex%20Ketchum"> </span></div>
            
            <div id="DHQtext">
               
               
               <div id="abstract">
                  <h2>Abstract</h2>
                  
                  
                  <p>This article looks at online history projects focused on “lost” spaces, with an
                     emphasis on lost LGBTQ+ spaces. In documenting lost spaces, these projects also
                     highlight lost or marginalized historical actors. I position these projects at the
                     center of debates surrounding how to recover “lost” peoples who have been left out or
                     erased from mainstream histories. This article will discuss the various techniques
                     used by digital humanities projects, focusing particularly on Jan Kurth’s “Lost
                     Womyn’s Space,” Greggor Mattson’s “Mapping Lost Lesbian Bars,” and my own project,
                     “The Feminist Restaurant Project.” This article discusses the various techniques used
                     and the value these open access history websites serve for scholars and non-scholars
                     alike. The article finishes by exploring how lost space projects preserve what was
                     not previously preserved, while these websites are simultaneously vulnerable to
                     similar preservation issues that plague digital humanities projects and community
                     archives more broadly, especially those separate from large institutions. These
                     challenges raise the questions: is lost space doomed to be lost? Can the history of
                     LGBTQ+ space be recuperated? What role do digital humanities have in this work? And
                     what does it mean to be found?</p>
                  </div>
               
               
               
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">What does it mean to be lost?</h1>
                  
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p1">1</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p1">In 1983, A Woman’s Coffeehouse of Minneapolis, Minnesota taped an open community meeting
                     during which members of the predominately white, working class, lesbian coffeehouse
                     could reflect on their experiences. One middle-aged participant remarked that by not
                     speaking with younger generations of lesbians about differences between their coming-out
                     experiences, she felt that “she [had] lost her
                     history,” <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#womanscoffeehouse1983">#womanscoffeehouse1983</a></span>. This woman’s concern about not having forums in
                     which to share and document her own history and that of her community was not unique.
                     Archivists and historians have discussed how to preserve and to recover LGBTQ+
                     histories; less attention has been given to the ways that digital humanities projects
                     have tried to preserve and recover “lost” LGBTQ+ spatial histories. This article seeks
                     to fill this gap in the literature by analyzing online projects focused on the history
                     “lost” LGBTQ+ spaces, particularly women’s spaces. </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p2">2</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p2">In documenting “lost” LGBTQ+ spaces, these projects highlight previously overlooked
                     marginalized historical actors and geographies. Although the scale of projects varies
                     from local studies to national or even international, these projects seek to empower
                     marginalized communities by acting as testimony to their existence, to provide resources
                     for others to build upon the research, and to document particular historical phenomena.
                     This paper will discuss the various techniques used by the creators of these projects,
                     particularly Jan Kurth’s “Lost Womyn’s Space,”
                     <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#kurth2011">#kurth2011</a></span> Greggor Mattson’s “Mapping Lost Lesbian Bars,”
                     <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#mattson2016">#mattson2016</a></span> and my own project, “The Feminist Restaurant Project”
                     <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#ketchum2015">#ketchum2015</a></span>. It is outside of the scope of this article to look at every history website
                     devoted to documenting or finding “lost” LGBTQ+ histories. Instead by narrowing it down
                     to the scope of projects devoted to documenting “lost” spaces, primarily lost lesbian
                     and queer women’s and feminist spaces on the national and international scale, this
                     paper still provides fruitful comparison. Despite the projects’ emphasis on lesbian
                     spatial culture, I use the LGBTQ+ umbrella. The three projects documented spaces that
                     served a wider range of people than just lesbians. Furthermore, the problematics raised
                     by this article relate to other “lost” LGBTQ+ projects, even if they are not wholly the
                     same. </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p3">3</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p3">For this article, I analyzed the projects themselves, as well as interviewed their
                     makers and included my own reflections as a project creator. In doing so, I explore
                     the
                     contribution that these websites make to the general public and scholars alike, paying
                     particular attention to why documenting lost spaces is so necessary to understanding
                     a
                     community’s history. The article concludes by exploring how although lost space projects
                     preserve narratives that have all but been erased or forgotten, these websites are
                     vulnerable to similar preservation issues that plague both digital humanities projects
                     and community archives, particularly those built separate from large institutions.
                     These
                     problems raise a number of questions, including: is lost space doomed to be lost?
                     Can
                     the history of LGBTQ+ space be recuperated? Is it possible to develop sustainable
                     digital preservation initiatives that attempt to document the experiences of LGBTQ+
                     spaces? I argue that digital spatial history projects do not replace community archives,
                     yet fulfill a different, complementary need. As such, the solution to the preservation
                     of these materials rests with institutionalization within an archive large enough
                     to
                     provide the necessary financial and technological resources to sustain the project
                     beyond the scope of the original, individual creator. </div>
                  </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Who and What is “Lost?” And Why Should We Care?</h1>
                  
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p4">4</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p4">Historians and archivists argue over how to recover missing or marginalized communities.
                     Archivists Joan M. Schwartz and Terry Cook posit that conventional record creation
                     and
                     archival practices mean that “some can afford to create and maintain records and some
                     cannot; that certain voices thus will be heard loudly and some not at all; that certain
                     views and ideas about society will in turn be privileged and others marginalized”
                     <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#schwartz2002">#schwartz2002</a></span>. Historians, such as Judith Bennet and Steven Maynard, and archivists,
                     such as Randall Jimerson, have shown that socially and culturally marginalized
                     communities, including LGBTQ+ communities, have also been marginalized in archives
                     and
                     the discipline of history
                     [<a class="ref" href="#bennett2000">Bennett 2000</a>] [<a class="ref" href="#jimerson2003">Jimerson 2003</a>] <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#maynard1991">#maynard1991</a></span>.
                     Resulting from the acknowledgement of this deficit
                     and beginning in the 1960s, social history sought to reclaim histories of marginalized
                     peoples. Archives, a vital aspect of this shift, transformed collection and preservation
                     practices in order to reflect these new historiographical interests. Archivists Marika
                     Cifor, Michelle Caswell, Alda Allina Migoni, and Noah Geraci have argued that this
                     phenomenon was especially apparent in the development of community archives. When
                     community archive movements developed as a response to the social and political
                     movements that came to the fore in 1960s and 1970s, “within each of these movements
                     activists and community groups recognized the significance of writing persons and
                     communities whose histories and lives had long been marginalized, erased, or
                     misrepresented into the historical record”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#cifor2018">Cifor et al. 2018</a>]. They show that the process of community archiving was a form of
                     “self-representation, identity construction, and empowerment,” affecting both past and
                     present
                     [<a class="ref" href="#cifor2018">Cifor et al. 2018</a>]. Melinda Marie Jetté (2019), James Brooks (2019), Jodie Boyd (2019), and
                     others have written about how necessary it is to document LGBTQ+ histories in a way
                     that
                     is accessible to the public in <cite class="title italic">The Public Historian</cite>’s Special
                     Issue on commemorating queer history. Despite efforts to recover the “lost” or
                     marginalized histories, traditional historical and archival practices, however, do
                     not
                     capture all of them. </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p5">5</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p5">As a result, LGBTQ+ community archives began to rectify this gap. These community
                     archives, such as the Lesbian Herstory Archives, often function outside of institutional
                     support, which enables the community to preserve its own histories, but can also make
                     the collections vulnerable to issues of funding and sustainability
                     <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#nestle2015">#nestle2015</a></span>. Community archives also do not preserve the histories of the entire LGBTQ+
                     community; in the North American context, when these communities are documented, it
                     is
                     often members of that community that live in large urban or coastal areas
                     <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#lee2015">#lee2015</a></span>. </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p6">6</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p6">While not fully compensating for this deficit, LGBTQ+ archival projects also exist
                     online. Archivist Erin O’Meara argues that collecting activists’ papers and documenting
                     related social movements has always had inherent problems, but digital techniques
                     complicate matters as they raise new questions around preservation
                     <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#omeara2012">#omeara2012</a></span>. Elise Chenier, founder of the Archives of Lesbian Oral Testimony, has several
                     articles on the challenges of preserving lesbian digital history projects including
                     issues of collection and retention, related to her work with oral histories
                     [<a class="ref" href="#chenier2010">Chenier 2010</a>] [<a class="ref" href="#chenier2015">Chenier 2015</a>]. Similarly, archivist Anthony Cocciolo discusses the challenges of
                     establishing a digital community archive, finding that establishing and maintaining
                     a
                     community digital archive necessitates navigating a complex set of technological and
                     social issues, including methods for capturing records, ownership and copyright,
                     digitization and born-digital record keeping, social media and web archiving, and
                     digital preservation
                     [<a class="ref" href="#cocciolo2017">Cocciolo 2017</a>]. However, art historian, Roxanne Samer continues to believe in the potential of
                     feminist and queer digital archives despite these issues, acknowledging that
                     intergenerational sharing of knowledge through digital archives may be the key to
                     this
                     information surviving
                     <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#samer2014">#samer2014</a></span>. While archivists have innovated new techniques to include more perspectives,
                     online history projects provide complementary and alternative materials yet face similar
                     problems. The unique nature of digital humanities projects necessitates different
                     solutions than are required for community archives, which have historically been wary
                     of
                     institutionalization.</div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p7">7</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p7">Access to narratives of marginalized people is impacted by accessibility of information
                     and access to technologies. Online public history projects provide new opportunities
                     to
                     share materials and create new or different avenues of access apart from physical
                     and
                     digital archives
                     [<a class="ref" href="#jacobs2017">Jacobs and Murgu 2017</a>](. Jan Kurth’s “Lost Womyn’s Space,” Greggor Mattson’s “Mapping Lost
                     Lesbian Bars,” and my own project, “The Feminist Restaurant Project,” are not digital
                     archives but rather digital humanities history projects that seek to collect, remember,
                     and retain information about LGBTQ+ spaces. These digital history projects build upon
                     a
                     tradition of LGBTQ+ individuals creating and utilizing new technological forms to
                     advocate about their communities. Their narrowed focus, particularly on the difficulty
                     of creating and retaining lesbian and queer women’s spaces, is paralleled by the
                     challenge of retaining records about these spaces in digital form. </div>
                  </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  
                  <h1 class="head">What does being “found” look like? What Makes Digital History Projects Different than
                     Community Archives? </h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p8">8</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p8">If to be “lost” is to be marginalized or erased, to be “found” or “to find” means
                     centering LGBTQ+ histories; some history websites do exactly that. One technique for
                     recovering marginalized histories has been to document where marginalized groups spent
                     time. As the editors of <cite class="title italic">Queers in Space</cite>, Gordon Brent Ingram,
                     Anne Bouthillette, and Yolanda Retter note, both permanent and temporary spaces were
                     important to queer activist organizing and community building
                     [<a class="ref" href="#ingram1997">Ingram, Bouthillette, and Retter 1997</a>]. Geographer Julie Podmore likewise argues the
                     importance of studying space to understand lesbian histories
                     <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#podmore2001">#podmore2001</a></span>. It is not that community archives do not provide evidence of community spaces,
                     but rather the emphasis of these websites is on documenting specifically community
                     spaces and providing visitors with information with which to explore these spaces
                     further. As Kurth notes, “Certainly I have seen a lot of projects since I started Lost
                     Womyn's Space that focus just on lesbian bars. I find that work of value, but I think
                     we
                     miss something when we don't look for parallels and connections with other forms of
                     women's space over time and geography” (2018). Since this research started, other
                     projects seeking to document lesbian and queer spaces have begun. In 2017, designer
                     Lucas LaRochelle began the community generated mapping project, Queering the Map,
                     that
                     geo-locates queer moments, memories and histories in relation to a world map. Unlike
                     the
                     three projects this article focuses on, Queering the Map seeks to represent queer
                     memories outside of fixed queer spaces, such as gay bars or lesbian bookstores, and
                     rather on ephemeral moments, published without dates, which happen anywhere in the
                     world
                     to mark experiences of queerness wherever they occur <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#larochelle2018">#larochelle2018</a></span>. While there is
                     strong value in recording individual memory, documenting the location of more formalized
                     geographies with fixed dates does something different; it provides a sense of space,
                     situated in specific historical moments, to which future generations can situate
                     themselves in relation to and build upon.</div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p9">9</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p9">The three projects this article focuses on, take space seriously on a national or
                     international scale by attending to an exploration of historical sites of LGBTQ+
                     socializing and political organizing. While they differ in their format and exact
                     focus,
                     they look at similar communities: lesbians, women with a focus on lesbians, and
                     feminists with an emphasis on lesbian feminists. Mattson’s work specifies bars, I
                     target
                     restaurants, cafes, and coffeehouses, and Kurth has the widest scope, encompassing
                     all
                     kinds of women’s spaces and businesses. Likewise Mattson has the most specific
                     geographic focus by looking solely at the United States, the Feminist Restaurant Project
                     is U.S. and Canada centered, and Kurth’s work is global
                     <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#kurth2018">#kurth2018</a></span>. The projects have some overlap and directly attribute the work of the other
                     creators in their own work
                     <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#mattson2016">#mattson2016</a></span>. </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p10">10</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p10">This article recognizes the different motivations of the sites’ creators and the
                     problematic nature of the individual creator being centered. On the one hand, these
                     projects work to represent large swaths of lesbian and queer women communities, yet
                     on
                     the other hand, the individuals doing the work shape them. The identities of the
                     creators impact their ability to do this labor and may influence the willingness of
                     others’ view of the authority of the content. That the creators of this work are
                     predominately white, and a self identified gay man academic (Mattson), queer woman
                     academic (Ketchum), and a lesbian non-academic (Kurth), affects which LGBTQ+ spaces
                     are
                     “found” — through who is willing to share resources with us, through our editorial
                     choices, and through how our work is understood as authoritative or non-authoritative.
                     Furthermore, a creator’s biases shape the form of the project and risk marginalizing
                     or
                     erasing histories of other marginalized groups while doing the work of recovering
                     or
                     showcasing “lost” LGBTQ+ histories. This phenomenon became particularly apparent when in
                     2019, Kurth made trans-exclusionary comments while discussing the lack of women’s
                     and
                     lesbian venues in a post. In doing so, her project that in fact includes community
                     spaces in which transgender people worked, gathered, and socialized, now minimizes
                     or
                     erases these histories. Responding to the marginalization, neglect, and deletion of
                     trans geographies and trans geographic histories, geographer Kath Browne challenges
                     how
                     “gender geographies have focused on normatively gendered men and women, neglecting
                     the
                     ways in which gender binaries can be contested and troubled” [<a class="ref" href="#browne2010">Brown, Nash, and Hines 2010</a>]. Browne builds on
                     the work of Viviane Namaste and Susanne Stryker and argues that “trans voices need to be
                     heard and new knowledges created from the specific understandings gained through lived
                     experiences” [<a class="ref" href="#browne2010">Brown, Nash, and Hines 2010</a>]. This is not to say that cisgendered creators are unable to include
                     trans voices or representations of LGBTQ+ communities of color, but rather that the
                     predominant whiteness and cisgendered identities of the creators of these projects
                     affects the representation of these historical geographies. This issue is especially
                     pertinent if the only, or majority, of projects documenting these spaces come from
                     a
                     white, cis perspective. While this article focuses on what it means to do the labor
                     of
                     recovering lost or missing histories, all to potentially lose these histories again,
                     the
                     individual creators’ identities impact the ability to do this work; the willingness
                     to
                     include or acknowledge certain people and spaces; and the form that work takes.</div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p11">11</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p11">Yielding to the call to think seriously about space, digital representations such
                     as
                     online mapping projects, scrapbook databases, and user forums focused on space,
                     highlight an aspect of historical preservation not fulfilled in the same manner by
                     an
                     archive. The projects surveyed in this article are part of a phenomenon of spatial
                     documentation. However, typically spatial projects have focused on local regions.
                     Creators benefit from access to insider community knowledge and histories, primarily
                     due
                     to the intensity of labor of gathering this information. Projects such as Found San
                     Francisco are advantaged by focusing on a targeted local region, which allow the
                     creators to delve in detail
                     <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#robb2012">#robb2012</a></span>. As Jan Kurth reflected, </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p12">12</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p12">
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>I also enjoy the various projects that put together and catalog “lost places,” as that
                           combines my interest in “space” and history. Typically, these efforts tend to be
                           localized, as hunting down all these places can be pretty labor intensive. So generally,
                           most of these projects will be devoted to particular cities, and sometimes, even more
                           specifically, to particular bars or LGBT bars in a particular city. I had noticed
                           that
                           lesbian bars tend to get “lost” in the city lists and even the LGBT lists, so I wanted
                           to highlight lost lesbian bars as those are rapidly disappearing. But as I played
                           around
                           in Google archives (later <a href="http://newspaper.com/" onclick="window.open('http://newspaper.com/'); return false" class="ref">newspaper.com</a>), and
                           on the Internet in general, I came across all kinds of interesting lost, disappearing,
                           or endangered women's spaces. So I thought it would be fun to have a kind of rangy
                           blog
                           for collecting all these places in one location
                           <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#kurth2018">#kurth2018</a></span>.</p>
                     </blockquote>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p13">13</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p13">Although projects focused on a smaller region can be more manageable, as individuals
                     in
                     that community can share their stories and collective memory, national and international
                     public history projects build awareness of the larger phenomenon of the desire for
                     community run spaces that are occurring beyond the local level. Both types of projects
                     are useful. Greggor Mattson agrees, remarking, “I like all the sites that are trying to
                     map gay bars and LGBT spaces. The New York site is the gold standard, in my view,
                     but
                     it's one that exceeds my abilities both technically and in terms of time to devote
                     to
                     it”
                     <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#mattson2018">#mattson2018</a></span>. He is referring to the NYC LGBT Historic Sites Project website, which consists of
                     an interactive map that links to histories of each location
                     <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#historicalsitesproject2017">#historicalsitesproject2017</a></span>. Mattson’s site, rather, tries “to be
                     nationally comprehensive,” yet he explains that “it's tough to just make sure that all
                     the regions are being represented.” Mattson focused only on the United States due to
                     language barriers and his own scholarly background. In my own experience, I focused
                     on
                     the United States and Canada because as a historian my training has focused on Canadian
                     and American historiographies. Furthermore, my digital project was tied to my
                     dissertation work in which I wanted to contextualize the development of these spaces
                     within the legal and economic context of their times. Researching feminist restaurant
                     histories for two countries was complicated to historically contextualize as I wanted
                     to
                     be specific about municipal, state/provincial, and federal laws. While my lens allowed
                     me to speak to trends and historical phenomena regarding feminist and lesbian feminist
                     restaurant creation, I had to sacrifice some precision; however, trying to integrate
                     more countries would have required more generalizations than I was comfortable making.
                     This article is concerned most specifically with the barriers of preserving LGBTQ+
                     spatial national and international projects, as unlike local projects, which are
                     typically supported by regional organizations, the larger scale projects are created,
                     updated, and preserved by individuals. For smaller scale regional projects without
                     institutional or organizational backing, the suggestions at the end of this article
                     will
                     be relevant. </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p14">14</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p14">Compiling data on national and international scales can be more difficult as source
                     materials are scattered. If this information is available on the Internet, as Kurth
                     denoted about some of her source materials, is it really lost? As the Indiana University
                     Lilly Library argued, when materials are in libraries, archives, or even on the
                     Internet, they are actually the opposite of “lost”(Bahr 2019). However, information,
                     particularly about marginalized communities, can be so scattered and inaccessible
                     to
                     locate that while it may not be formally lost, it can be “lost.” To be “lost” is to be
                     unable or difficult to find. The sites surveyed in this article collate this
                     information, bringing it together for users and often creating duplicate files of
                     these
                     records, which can disappear at a moment’s notice, as had been the case with Google
                     Archives. This creation of records is not the only way that these digital history
                     projects differ from digital archives. Usually, larger projects require input from
                     users
                     as the creators may not be familiar with the areas discussed.</div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p15">15</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p15">Crowdsourcing information is a key component for revealing histories of lost spaces,
                     especially for projects on the national and international scale. LGBTQ+ history projects
                     particularly benefit from crowdsourcing as the former users of these spaces are less
                     likely to have had their recollections previously recorded, as marginalized communities’
                     experiences are not only marginalized in historical and archival contexts, but also
                     in
                     the popular media
                     <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#lostpubs2018">#lostpubs2018</a></span>.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e396">[1]</a> Greggor Mattson’s <cite class="title inline">Mapping Lost Lesbian Bars</cite> utilizes
                     crowdsourcing. He admits on his site that “it is inevitable that there are errors in
                     this kind of enterprise – please send me corrections and queries to” his email and
                     Twitter account. He likewise explains, “Eventually I will merge this with a map of
                     currently-open lesbian bars, which I’ll launch as a crowdsourcing effort”
                     <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#mattson2016">#mattson2016</a></span>. This kind of community driven research on lost spaces benefits from a wide
                     variety of perspectives and experiences. Crowdsourcing also generates publicity through
                     the initial launch of the call for submissions and thus also draws more attention
                     to
                     these sites. On the Feminist Restaurant Project website, there are multiple calls
                     asking
                     visitors to contribute to the project. Although the initial directory and map were
                     based
                     on my amalgamation of old travel guides, periodicals, advertisements, and interviews,
                     I
                     created the website in part for the purpose of crowdsourcing new information. The
                     website has a page called “Submissions” in which I ask users, “Know of a feminist
                     restaurant, cafe, or coffeehouse that existed/exists in the United States and Canada?
                     Please check if it is listed on the database — if not, email The Feminist Restaurant
                     Project to let us know.” Likewise above the directory I have a note asking for feedback
                     <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#ketchum2015">#ketchum2015</a></span>. Since I first launched the site in April 2015, I have only received about a dozen
                     emails from people who found me through the site, but they were thorough, full of
                     information, and quite helpful. The directory and its associated maps thus become
                     living
                     documents that grow as readership grows. As Jan Kurth has stayed anonymous on her
                     site,
                     her information is not crowdsourced in the same way.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e427">[2]</a> Users can post comments but cannot email her
                     through the site. While the Lost Womyn’s Spaces site shows that crowdsourcing is not
                     the
                     only technique creators can use to collect information, the method is still valuable.
                     The creation of websites with maps and directories, like those of Mattson and my own,
                     allow for users to get directly involved, turning the site into a kind of community
                     project/ archive. </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p16">16</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p16">Social media works as an invaluable tool for crowdsourcing information for these digital
                     history projects. Mattson finds information through social media and spreads awareness
                     about his research on Twitter. He found that “most gay bars communicate better on
                     Facebook than by phone or e-mail”
                     <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#mattson2018">#mattson2018</a></span>. Facebook enabled him to contact bar owners for interviews. He then used his
                     social media presence and his website as a way to add credibility to his requests,
                     explaining, “I thought it would be useful for them to see that they were part of
                     something bigger to induce them to accept my request for an interview. I wanted them
                     to
                     see that this was something I'd been thinking about for a while and that I was serious”
                     <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#mattson2018">#mattson2018</a></span>. I, likewise, have found social media sites, particularly Facebook and Twitter to
                     be invaluable resources
                     <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#ketchum2019">#ketchum2019</a></span>. Facebook group administrators allowed me to join their online communities and
                     pose questions to the members, asking if people had resources about other feminist
                     restaurants or if they wanted to be interviewed. Like Mattson, I used my website,
                     The
                     Feminist Restaurant Project, to demonstrate the work I had already done on the topic
                     and
                     had a publicly available source that could be shared within these communities. I used
                     Twitter to connect with people whose email addresses I did not have or could not find,
                     as well as to publicize the project. As my research progressed, I was able to use
                     these
                     social media channels as a way to keep the community informed about the state of the
                     project and publications. It has been a relationship of reciprocity. </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p17">17</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p17">Community archives do rely on donations from community members, but the kind of exchange
                     on these websites is different. Digital LGBTQ+ spatial history projects collect
                     scattered information from around the Internet, from physical archives, guide and
                     travel
                     books, and the oral histories and shared memories of community members. These digital
                     projects thus, do not only gather information that could not be found in a single
                     community archive, but the process of creating these sites produces knowledge. Users
                     are
                     motivated to share stories that would otherwise perish along with them. While similar
                     to
                     community archives, these digital projects do something different. This difference
                     is
                     made clear in how their information is displayed.</div>
                  </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Visuals: Spatial Histories and What Digital History Projects Offer that Community
                     Archives Do Not</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p18">18</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p18">To be lost is to be hidden or unseen. To be found is to be revealed. Even our language
                     around being lost and found speaks to visual culture. All three sites use visuals
                     in
                     different ways to draw in readers and contribute to underlying arguments. In Kurth’s
                     scrapbook format, where she pastes any relevant information within the blog post,
                     she
                     includes photographs of the businesses when available, Google Streetview images of
                     the
                     buildings when an address was known, and other photos and illustrations. Mattson,
                     likewise “found it touching to use Google street view and have a look at the outside of
                     the buildings when it was still a lesbian bar: the rainbows or triangles or posters
                     for
                     women's bands”
                     <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#mattson2018">#mattson2018</a></span>. He had a research assistant take the screenshots and post them so that as Google
                     Streetview updates with the new exteriors, at least one image of the bar would remain.
                     He remarks “I have no pictures of the gay bars that I've liked to visit, in part because
                     I'm old fashioned about not taking pictures in or around gay bars in case someone
                     is
                     closeted,”
                     <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#mattson2018">#mattson2018</a></span> yet he knows how valuable these visuals can also be. While the display of this
                     visual information differs between the three sites, none follow the format of digital
                     archives’ formatting of folders filled with jpegs of images from the physical archives
                     or reproduced text, as is the case with projects like the Queer Zine Archives and
                     the
                     Lesbian Herstory Archives.</div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p19">19</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p19">Apart from physical pictures, these websites provide other visual cues that speak
                     to the
                     existence of “lost” communities. Kurth’s website’s side bar, that shows the number of
                     blog post entries written per month, is another powerful visual that conveys how many
                     spaces existed that are now “lost.” The 644 posts make clear that these spaces were not
                     a rare or isolated phenomenon. I was, likewise, motivated by the visual power of numbers
                     when I decided to make my directory and maps publicly available. An immediate benefit
                     of
                     quantitative mapping techniques is that they show the preponderance of these spaces.
                     Based on my initial estimates before beginning my research, I guessed that there were,
                     at most, 40 feminist restaurants, cafés, and coffeehouses in America and Canada. In
                     fact, the number of verified feminist restaurants, cafés, and coffeehouses from the
                     1972-1989 is over 250 and, further, there are over 430 unverified spaces, and it is
                     likely, feminist spaces are included in this set. The verified and unverified spaces
                     are
                     color coded with pink and blue markings on the site. These visual cues help quantify
                     the
                     space.</div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p20">20</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p20">One approach to understanding lesbian feminist history is to mark where women gathered.
                     Maps can change conceptualizations of the past in ways that narratives cannot alone.</div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p21">21</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p21">Both Mattson and I use maps to serve multiple purposes. Some of my maps simply show
                     where places actually existed, some show the variety of feminist businesses in a single
                     area during a single year, based only on one guidebook, and some are part of a larger
                     history project, which takes information from interviewees and provides a space for
                     continual community building, through memory sharing. The initial goal was to map
                     out
                     the locations of feminist restaurants and cafés, the types of women’s spaces that
                     I have
                     chosen to focus on, within the United States and Canada from 1972 to 1989, a process
                     never before completed. From this map it is possible construct a sense of what the
                     feminist and lesbian community in a particular space and time looked like. A large,
                     public map served the goal of drawing attention to the legacy of the women founders
                     of
                     feminist restaurants, cafés, and coffeehouses who made this project feasible by making
                     this information as publicly accessible as possible and also by developing new forums
                     in
                     which former participants could expand their community, during a time when many women’s
                     spaces are closing or have closed. Greggor Mattson shared a similar motivation. He
                     explains “I like making Google maps because they help me visualize things alongside
                     other sets of data... for example, I can use Social Explorer to eyeball whether it
                     resembles population density, or I can use Google's Street View to have a look at
                     the
                     building and neighborhood that the bar is/was located in”
                     <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#mattson2018">#mattson2018</a></span>. The map was both beneficial for visualizing results and analysis. He realized
                     that these images could be useful for his readers, noting that, “I guess I felt like I'd
                     gone to this trouble of helping map where these lesbian bars had been, that I might
                     as
                     well share it with others”
                     <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#mattson2018">#mattson2018</a></span>. Maps allow users to interact with information and provide powerful visuals. The
                     time has come to take space seriously, not just intellectually but methodologically,
                     in
                     researching the past; creating publicly available maps enables this pursuit. </div>
                  </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Format and the Individual</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p22">22</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p22">Choices regarding format also shapes the way that users interact with the site and
                     understand the motivations and intentions of the creators. Mattson’s and my site
                     explicitly mention our larger academic projects with which the public sites are
                     correlated. The matter is more complicated with Lost Womyn’s Spaces. Kurth notes,
                     </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p23">23</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p23">
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>I chose the format I have so that I would be highlighting individual places, and
                           highlighting the details of that particular place's existence. I like specificity.
                           I
                           think that theoretical generalizations are often in danger of wandering too far afield
                           if care is not taken. The trade off is that some readers may get caught up in the
                           details, and not be able to see the patterns I think are pretty clear that run across
                           the histories of many former women's places. Clearly some readers are only interested
                           in
                           a particular bar they used to go to back in the 80s, and that's fine. I have sometimes
                           thought I should write some sort of essay highlighting the patterns with all the
                           documentation I have collected, but honestly, I don't know how many would be interested
                           and I really don't have the time
                           <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#kurth2018">#kurth2018</a></span>.</p>
                     </blockquote> </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p24">24</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p24">She does actually include some editorializing information within her posts, supplying
                     commentary in the margins. While Kurth states that the scrapbook style can be utilized
                     as users wish, she also somewhat directs readers toward her argument, noting “I think my
                     motivation has been pretty much the same, which is to create an outlet for a very
                     wide
                     range of lost women's spaces. But the more places I collected, the more I saw certain
                     patterns that most don't know, so I like to highlight those and bring them to the
                     attention of readers”
                     <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#kurth2018">#kurth2018</a></span>. Between March 2011 and June 2019, she wrote over 652 posts. Most posts focus on
                     the history of a single space and are typically a collection of newspaper articles,
                     advertisements, entries on review sites such as Yelp, and whatever photos and other
                     information she can find pasted in what she calls her “blog scrapbook” formatting.
                     However more significantly, Lost Womyn’s Space’s format reflected Kurth’s desire to
                     provide records of a smattering of spaces that users can engage with as desired, rather
                     than be directed. Kurth believes that “it's fun to have a blog to throw things on that
                     are interesting. There is so much available on the Internet right now that really
                     needs
                     to be curated in some way to make it more accessible in a single location”
                     <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#kurth2018">#kurth2018</a></span>. Having read all 652 posts, these arguments begin to come through clearly, yet if
                     a user just reads one or two posts, the details of the scrapbook format tend to dominate
                     reader experience. </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p25">25</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p25"> What is clear is that each website’s specifics relate to the individuality of their
                     creators. As each of these three projects are created primarily by one person, our
                     individual experiences, motivations, educational backgrounds, and biases shape the
                     projects. Our geographic focuses are influenced by language and cultural knowledge.
                     Even
                     when Kurth has tried to include information from countries around the world, she
                     “realized pretty early that Google search engines keep corralling me back to English
                     language sites, which means the focus is on English speaking countries. Occasionally
                     I'd
                     figure out a strategy to break free, but I haven't found as much as I would like outside
                     the US, Canada, UK, etc”
                     <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#kurth2018">#kurth2018</a></span>. Apart from geographic positioning, our training has shaped our methodologies in
                     creating these websites. I had previously worked as a research assistant which tracked
                     changes in every edition of the Canadian Medical Directory and that influenced my
                     methodology to track edition changes in directories and guidebooks. While we all worked
                     on related topics, our specific training and skills impacted our methodological choices
                     and thus the end product. And so, while these projects are for the greater public
                     and
                     larger community, each site carries its author’s fingerprints. Having an individual’s
                     viewpoint does not negate the usefulness of these sites, as individuals also shape
                     documentation in community archives. However, it is this tie to the individual that
                     puts
                     these projects in danger. </div>
                  </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Failures and Finishing</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p26">26</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p26"> None of these projects were built in a single attempt, but rather were evolving
                     undertakings where the creators have adapted, changed, and experimented. Jan Kurth
                     has
                     worked on her site since 2011, my site went live in 2015, and Mattson’s page with
                     maps
                     launched on September 17, 2016. Each creator dealt with failures that required
                     innovation. Mattson had difficulties with his social media accounts. His Twitter project
                     (@WhoNeedsGayBars) never really took off like he thought it would. He originally
                     believed that users would communicate with him and follow the project through Twitter,
                     but most of his followers were bots. Rather than functioning as a news stream about
                     gay
                     bars, as it was originally intended, Mattson uses his site as a way to be able to
                     scroll
                     through a timeline of articles
                     <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#mattson2018">#mattson2018</a></span>. I had a similar experience of making assumptions about what users would want and
                     initially completely missed the mark. I spent months researching different map-making
                     applications that would allow users to upload information to the site. I experimented
                     with Nunaliit, Postscrap, Google Social Maps Experience, and Esri’s Story Map
                     Crowdsource (beta), and eventually chose Story Map.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e537">[3]</a> I later learned that users preferred to communicate with me via email
                     and have me make the changes on the map, rather than each person altering the map
                     herself. These stories of failure also point to the fact that these projects can
                     continuously be improved, begging the question: can a “lost” project ever truly be
                     complete?</div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p27">27</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p27">Unlike a published book, public history websites can be updated ad infinitum, forcing
                     creators to decide when to end the project. Placing parameters on a project allows
                     for a
                     sense of completion. Mattson chose to restrict his project to the 10-year timeframe
                     of
                     2006-2016. However, he explains that “I've got a larger project that is using LGBT
                     guidebooks to track the closures of bars for lesbians, and this mapping project turned
                     out to be just an early version of the larger one. In those early stages I thought
                     I was
                     going to find that gay bars were just closing, but it turns out it's a much more
                     complicated picture. Even for lesbian bars, at least three have opened this year.
                     No one
                     has created a ‘Found Womyn's Spaces Blog,’ so tracking only the closures of what are,
                     in
                     the end, small businesses, doesn't capture the new ones that arise”
                     <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#mattson2018">#mattson2018</a></span>. While the Mapping Lost Bars project is complete, it is part of a larger, ongoing
                     endeavor. For my project, the completion of my dissertation produced one kind of ending.
                     However, as I turn my dissertation into a book manuscript, I continue to update the
                     site. Also, as I publish more information about the topic of feminist restaurants,
                     including academic articles and non-academic books, I include that information on
                     the
                     website. The maps I built originally in 2015 based off of the women’s/lesbian
                     guidebooks, a kind of methodology that Mattson has begun to likewise use to track
                     bar
                     closures, have only been updated a few times since the website originally launched.
                     I
                     have considered working with a research assistant or information studies scholar to
                     digitize and make word searchable every copy of Gaia’s Guides and map every single
                     kind
                     of business mentioned with color codes. I have also considered making the map specific
                     down to addresses, rather than just city centers and include photos, histories, and
                     personal stories, similar to the NYC LGBT Historic Sites Project website. However,
                     I
                     currently do not have the resources to enact these changes. After years of keeping
                     The
                     Feminist Restaurant Project updated, my work on the site has slowed. Jan Kurth shares
                     a
                     similar sentiment stating,</div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p28">28</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p28">
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>I suppose I could quit at any time and it would be more or less complete. I still
                           see
                           mention of lost lesbian bars now and then, so I'll add those as time permits. Or maybe
                           search for an old ad for a ladies cafe from 1900. But because of a lot more demands
                           on
                           my time these days, I just don't have the same hours to devote to this as I used to.
                           I
                           don't really see an "end goal" as the thing doesn't really have a beginning. It is
                           what
                           it is, I suppose
                           <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#kurth2018">#kurth2018</a></span>.</p>
                     </blockquote> </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p29">29</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p29">Mattson did most of his work over eighteen months. I spent four years actively updating
                     the site. Jan Kurth has spent seven years on her site but has decreased her rate of
                     posting over the past three years. Between June 2019 and June 2020, she did not write
                     a
                     single post. These projects point to the difficulties of sustaining these kinds of
                     ventures. “lost” spaces keep being lost. History keeps expanding. An individual’s
                     resources, however, have limitations. The topic of endings speaks to larger questions
                     regarding maintenance and preservation. </div>
                  </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Preservation: is lost space doomed to be lost? </h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p30">30</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p30"> The process of finding lost spaces is about creating a record. The projects discussed
                     in this article host their records online. Rapidly changing file formats, domain name
                     ownerships lapsing, and new technologies threaten preservation. The struggle to keep
                     resources up-to-date and accessible has led historians and archivists to fear that
                     the
                     current era will be the digital Dark Ages for future generations. Websites disappear.
                     Head of the British Library's web archiving program, Stephen Bury, explained how the
                     program preserved important records that only existed online, noting that “if we hadn't
                     done that nobody would have access to the information, the photographs, the interviews
                     on that site”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#fowler2009">Fowler 2009</a>] <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#milligan2013">#milligan2013</a></span> <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#milligan2018">#milligan2018</a></span>.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e581">[4]</a> Keeping websites functioning and up-to-date is a
                     specific struggle that requires constant maintenance, necessitating labor and financial
                     resources. While the British Library has financial resources for this kind of work,
                     all
                     three of the projects surveyed in this article are maintained by individuals without
                     any
                     dedicated institutional funding.</div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p31">31</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p31">Maintaining digital resources, especially projects independent of large institutional
                     resources, is difficult. Greggor Mattson explains that his site “will live on my Google
                     page forever, I guess, but until you asked it never occurred to me that it might be
                     something that would interest an archive. But it's true: who archives the exteriors
                     of
                     the lesbian bars of Salt Lake City or
                     Tulsa?” <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#mattson2018">#mattson2018</a></span>. Kurth said she has not given thought of how to preserve the work but is
                     interested in ideas. I, too, am unsure of how to proceed. I built the site on Google’s
                     Blogger platform so that I would not have to pay hosting fees and just pay a modest
                     fee
                     of around fifteen dollars yearly to maintain my domain name. However, the site is
                     vulnerable to the whims of Google, which could decide to end Blogger and Google Maps.
                     The site also requires frequent maintenance and updates. All of this work depends
                     on my
                     donated labor and is vulnerable to my own mortality
                     <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#ketchum2018">#ketchum2018</a></span>. Outside of saving the posts as Word file documents and saving them on external
                     hard drives and digital storage, personal attempts at preservation flounder. When
                     I
                     posed this question to readers of my site, the only solution offered was the Internet
                     Archive
                     <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#anon2017">#anon2017</a></span>. The Internet Archive, a 501(c)(3) non-profit, is building a digital library of
                     Internet sites and other cultural artifacts in digital form; for example, it saved
                     copies of The Feminist Restaurant Project 27 times between May 9, 2015 and August
                     24,
                     2018. Despite the Internet Archive’s Wayback Machine preserving 341 billion web pages
                     over the past twenty years, it is only useful if users know what they are searching
                     for.
                     Also, it seems precarious to depend exclusively on this single site. While the Internet
                     has been touted as a democratization of knowledges and a tool for making knowledge
                     more
                     accessible, the ephemeral quality of digital resources challenges this narrative of
                     accessibility. How do we as public historians and archivists preserve digital projects?
                     Is our work fated to disappear?</div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p32">32</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p32">As scholars Marika Cifor and Stacy Wood demonstrate, archives and public history
                     projects centered on marginalized, particularly LGBTQ+ communities have often decided
                     to
                     remain independent and not join with an institution. Elise Chenier likewise explains
                     that “one of the major concerns expressed about the current shift of LGBTQ materials
                     from community-based archives to institutional libraries, archives, and special
                     collections is that collections will no longer be shaped by LGBTQ praxis”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#chenier2016">Chenier 2016</a>]. They report that organizations such as the Lesbian Herstory Archives (LHA) are
                     “decidedly suspect of the long-term investment in and commitment to these initiatives
                     [and as a result] many organizations chose to keep collecting efforts autonomous and
                     community driven, ensuring that collections, policies, and materials were not subject
                     to
                     changing priorities within universities”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#cooper2013">Cooper 2013</a>] <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#corban">#corban</a></span> <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#mckinney2015">#mckinney2015</a></span>. However, as evidenced above, by the example of the
                     British Library’s Web Archiving project, institutions provide more funding stability
                     and
                     are not predicated on one individual’s circumstances in the same way. </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p33">33</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p33">Perhaps some compromise can be made. Ann Cvetkovich has proposed <em class="term">Queer Archive
                        Activism</em> that calls for something beyond the financial and infrastructural support of
                     the institution, but also requires space for active engagement with materials and
                     a
                     space for housing materials that push against traditional archival notions of
                     evidentiary value
                     [<a class="ref" href="#cvetkovich2011">Cvetkovich 2011</a>]. This debate between institution and community driven projects continues
                     [<a class="ref" href="#eichhorn2014">Eichhorn 2014</a>] [<a class="ref" href="#juhasz2006">Juhasz 2006</a>]. Online history projects serve a kind of counter narrative to the
                     erasure or marginalization of LGBTQ+ histories; however, with their creation comes
                     new
                     challenges. Since these digital history projects are different than community archives
                     and rather than dependent on a small group are so tied to one individual,
                     institutionalization within an archive that has the financial and technological
                     resources to sustain or retain the project is necessary. To be incorporated within
                     that
                     institution would help maintain these projects, which serve as valuable resources
                     to
                     understanding LGBTQ+ spatial histories. Moving away from a burden on the individual
                     and
                     towards institutionalization will give these projects a greater chance of survival.
                     Ideally, community members will be included and the kind of engagement that Cvetkovich
                     proposes can exist. As Kurth states, “If somebody else wants to take one or more of
                     these places and do more research that's great! Or even come up with their own
                     observations and generalizations based on the data. I have no problem with that at
                     all.
                     I welcome it.”
                     <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#kurth2018">#kurth2018</a></span>. Mattson and I share a similar sentiment, hoping that our work of collecting and
                     retaining will be built upon. In order for the future work to be done, these sites
                     must
                     be preserved and institutionalization will enable this work. </div>
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Conclusion</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p34">34</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p34">The stakes of preserving the history of lost LGBTQ+ spaces are high. Directors of
                     the
                     Lesbian and Gay Liberation in Canada, Michelle Schwartz and Constance Crompton discuss
                     how history-making practices of lesbian feminists offer a model of cultural history
                     preservation and transmission for those who create digital resources. They write that
                     “while this history-making situates researchers and their sisters in relation to lost
                     history, there is something in the perpetual reinvigoration and revisiting of these
                     lists and projects, often started anew every decade, which leads us to ask about the
                     lack of cultural transmission between lesbian generations” <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#schwartz2018">#schwartz2018</a></span>. In particular, they
                     argue that even though individuals should maintain a right to privacy and a right
                     to be
                     forgotten, “we must also weigh the danger to both feminism and queer politics of hiding
                     our history, forcing each new generation to start anew, with only the haziest
                     stereotypes about previous generations to draw on for strength, or worse, to look
                     on
                     with derision, against the threat of confrontation, doxing, or violence to named
                     activists” <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#schwartz2018">#schwartz2018</a></span>. Without proper preservation “lost” history projects risk being “lost”
                     or re-forgotten, forcing future generations to repeat the work of recovery.</div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p35">35</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p35">This article has focused on online history projects that center women’s, lesbian,
                     and
                     queer women’s spaces within a greater narrative of reclaiming LGBTQ+ spaces as a way
                     to
                     study histories of marginalized peoples. Jan Kurth’s <cite class="title inline">Lost Womyn’s Space,</cite> Greggor
                     Mattson’s <cite class="title inline">Mapping Lost Lesbian Bars,</cite> and my own project, <cite class="title inline">The Feminist Restaurant
                        Project</cite> use crowdsourcing, social media, visuals, and mapping in order to inspire other
                     researchers, contribute to the collective memory of LGBTQ+ communities, and further
                     the
                     creators’ other work. Lost space projects are important. These digital projects
                     highlight lost or marginalized historical actors. In the case of the endeavors studied
                     in this article, women’s, lesbian, feminist, and queer spaces bring attention to
                     histories that have been lost or forgotten and speak to larger conversations within
                     history, archival research, and digital humanities about the need to document and
                     preserve materials and stories of marginalized communities. However, as these projects
                     rely on the efforts of individuals, and are divorced from institutional support and
                     self-funded, they are vulnerable to being re-lost or re-forgotten. Institutionalization
                     is necessary for their survival and can free future generations from needing to repeat
                     this labor. To institutionalize or archive an individual project merely ends a single
                     iteration of the work. By preserving these sites, my hope is that future generations
                     will build upon and adapt these projects to new futures and circumstances.</div>
                  </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Acknowledgements</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p36">36</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p36">I would like to acknowledge the helpful feedback I received when presenting this
                     research at the Association of Canadian Archivists in 2019. </div>
                  </div>
               
               
               
               
               
               </div>
            
            <div id="notes">
               <h2>Notes</h2>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e396"><span class="noteRef lang en">[1] This technique is not exclusive to LGBTQ+ focused history
                     projects. The non-LGBTQ+ project, the “Lost Pub Project” which documents the decline
                     of the English pub, has compiled over 35,000 entries. On the website, which functions
                     as a kind of directory, the makers write, “Help our community project to archive
                     these lost pubs before they are forgotten forever. If you know of a pub which has
                     closed at any time in the past, please submit it, together with any anecdotes,
                     historical information or photographs that you might have.” They further ask users to
                     check for inconsistencies, writing that “pubs do re-open from time to time, so if you
                     see one on the site that is open please let us know.” The creators share information
                     on their website, Facebook, and twitter channels and users can check the database
                     by
                     clicking on city/town names and seeing listings. While the Lost Pub Project shows
                     that lost LGBTQ+ pages are not unique in their use crowdsourcing, the technique is
                     still valuable. As of October 31, 2018, the site features 35, 323 lost pubs, together
                     with 20,509 photos.</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e427"><span class="noteRef lang en">[2]  She has given me permission
                     to use her name for this article.</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e537"><span class="noteRef lang en">[3]  Picking the right kind of
                     software to create a public map that invited user feedback was particularly difficult
                     in 2013. At first, there was no application that directly suited my needs. Initially
                     I considered Nunaliit and Postscrap, both developed by University of Carleton
                     geographers. Neither fit the exact needs of the project because of the frameworks
                     they necessitated. Further, the Google Social Maps Experience did not give the
                     researcher oversight and editing capabilities over the content, leaving the
                     opportunity for the map to be trolled. On that application, if a map was publicly
                     available, anyone could add or delete data and, because of this, users might be less
                     likely to feel safe uploading their content knowing that it could be changed or
                     deleted by anyone. In 2016, Esri launched Story Map, a map builder that allowed
                     anyone to create an account or use one’s Google profile or Facebook account to post
                     onto the map. Story Map Crowdsource (beta) is an ArcGIS web application designed to
                     collect photos and captions from anyone and display them on a map that Esri kept in
                     beta until 2018. The application was easy to use and configure, and could be used
                     in
                     a web browser on laptop and desktop computers, mobile phones, and tablets.
                     Contributors can sign in with their Facebook, Google, ArcGIS account, or participate
                     as an anonymous guest. Further, creators of the map have oversight over the content.
                     The program thus allows for a good balance of permitting users to not have to commit
                     too much personal information in order to participate, but still know that their
                     contribution is relatively safe. There are some drawbacks however, besides the $2,500
                     annual subscription fee, which was thankfully covered by McGill University. It was
                     not possible to upload or create a non-editable basemap without it being at risk of
                     deletion, due to the Beta status of the program. Ideally it would have been possible
                     to just export my master Google Map as a kml file, convert it to an ArcGIs readable
                     file, which is readable by ArcGIS, the software Esri relies upon, and then use those
                     points as a background layer over which users would be able to only edit a top layer.
                     Also, currently, users are supposed to upload a photo and do not have the option to
                     solely upload text. As a workaround, I suggested that users just upload a photo of
                     a
                     square and then write their text, but this situation is less than ideal. A positive
                     aspect of this system is that the Esri program is quite user friendly and requires
                     very little web literacy, relative to other mapping software. However, despite the
                     friendly interface, some of these issues dissuaded some potential users. Another
                     issue is that, unlike QGIS, which uses Python, the Esri site does not allow for the
                     development of plugins in the Beta version. Nonetheless, in September 2016, the
                     Feminist Restaurant Crowdsource StoryMap launched and was embedded in “The Feminist
                     Restaurant Project” website. And after all of that- no one used it. Users preferred
                     emailing me about their own narratives or communicating with me in other ways. The
                     site’s users were not interested in actually making the map themselves, despite
                     saying that they were. People liked the idea of it existing and talked about that
                     being an exciting option but ultimately were not interested in map making. It turns
                     out that my simpler Google maps were preferable for the communities I was engaging
                     with. </span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e581"><span class="noteRef lang en">[4]  Ian Milligan’s WARC project offers
                     another approach to web archiving in a way that allows historians to more easily
                     access data. This project also connects to his work on WALK (Web Archives for
                     Longitudinal Knowledge). </span></div>
            </div>
            <div id="worksCited">
               <h2>Works Cited</h2>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id=""><!-- close --></span>Ketchum A. The Feminist Restaurant Project [web site]. <a href="http://thefeministrestaurantproject.com" onclick="window.open('http://thefeministrestaurantproject.com'); return false" class="ref">http://thefeministrestaurantproject.com</a>. (2015).</div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id=""><!-- close --></span>Ketchum A. Digital Dark Ages, Documenting Food Histories, and Honoring Lynne Olver
                  [web
                  site]. <a href="http://www.historicalcookingproject.com/2018/08/digital-dark-ages-documenting-food.html" onclick="window.open('http://www.historicalcookingproject.com/2018/08/digital-dark-ages-documenting-food.html'); return false" class="ref">http://www.historicalcookingproject.com/2018/08/digital-dark-ages-documenting-food.html</a>.
                  (2018).</div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id=""><!-- close --></span>Ketchum A. Memory Has Added Seasoning: The Legacy of Feminist Restaurants in the United
                  States and Canada. Anthropology of Food. <a href="http://journals.openedition.org/aof/9904" onclick="window.open('http://journals.openedition.org/aof/9904'); return false" class="ref">http://journals.openedition.org/aof/9904</a>. (2019).</div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id=""><!-- close --></span>Kurth J. Lost and Found. Lost Womyn’s Space. <a href="http://lostwomynsspace.blogspot.com" onclick="window.open('http://lostwomynsspace.blogspot.com'); return false" class="ref">http://lostwomynsspace.blogspot.com</a>. (2011).</div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id=""><!-- close --></span>Kurth J. On Making Lost Womyn’s Space. (2018).</div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id=""><!-- close --></span>LaRochelle, L. Queering the Map. <a href="https://www.queeringthemap.com" onclick="window.open('https://www.queeringthemap.com'); return false" class="ref">https://www.queeringthemap.com</a> (2017).</div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id=""><!-- close --></span>Lee KM, Page-Vanore C, Stankrauff A. Partnership in the Preservation of Rustbelt Queer
                  HIstory [web site]. (<a href="http://www.archivejournal.net/essays/partnership-in-the-preservation-of-rustbelt-queer-history/" onclick="window.open('http://www.archivejournal.net/essays/partnership-in-the-preservation-of-rustbelt-queer-history/'); return false" class="ref">http://www.archivejournal.net/essays/partnership-in-the-preservation-of-rustbelt-queer-history/</a>.
                  (2015).</div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id=""><!-- close --></span>Lost Pubs Project. Archiving the Decline of the English Pub [web site]. <a href="http://www.closedpubs.co.uk" onclick="window.open('http://www.closedpubs.co.uk'); return false" class="ref">http://www.closedpubs.co.uk</a>. (2018).</div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id=""><!-- close --></span>Mattson G. Lesbian Bar Closures. Who Needs Gay Bars. <a href="https://greggormattson.com/2016/09/17/mapping-lost-lesbian-bars-2006-2016/" onclick="window.open('https://greggormattson.com/2016/09/17/mapping-lost-lesbian-bars-2006-2016/'); return false" class="ref">https://greggormattson.com/2016/09/17/mapping-lost-lesbian-bars-2006-2016/</a>.
                  (2016).</div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id=""><!-- close --></span>Mattson G. The Creation of Mapping Lost Lesbian Bars. (2018).</div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id=""><!-- close --></span>Maynard S. ‘The Burning, Wilful Evidence’: Lesbian/Gay History and Archival Research.
                  Archivaria, 33 (1991):195–201.</div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id=""><!-- close --></span>McKinney C. Body, Sex, Interface: Reckoning with Images at the Lesbian Herstory
                  Archives. Radical History Review,122 (2015):115–128.</div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id=""><!-- close --></span>Milligan I. A WARC to Topic Model Visualization Workflow [web site]. <a href="https://ianmilligan.ca/2013/05/15/warc-to-topic-models/" onclick="window.open('https://ianmilligan.ca/2013/05/15/warc-to-topic-models/'); return false" class="ref">https://ianmilligan.ca/2013/05/15/warc-to-topic-models/</a>. (2013).</div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id=""><!-- close --></span>Milligan I. Web Archives for Longitudinal Knowledge [web site]. <a href="http://webarchives.ca/about" onclick="window.open('http://webarchives.ca/about'); return false" class="ref">http://webarchives.ca/about</a>. (2018).</div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id=""><!-- close --></span>Nestle J. Who Were We to Do Such a Thing? Grassroots Necessities, Grassroots Dreaming:
                  The LHA in Its Early Years. Radical History Review,122 (2015):233–242.</div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id=""><!-- close --></span>New York City LGBT Historical Sites Project. Making an Invisible History Visible [web
                  site]. <a href="https://www.nyclgbtsites.org" onclick="window.open('https://www.nyclgbtsites.org'); return false" class="ref">https://www.nyclgbtsites.org</a>.
                  (2017).</div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id=""><!-- close --></span>O’Meara E. Perfecting the New Wave of Collecting: Documenting Feminist Activism in
                  the
                  Digital Age. In: Bly L, Wooten K, eds. Make Your Own History: Documenting Feminist
                  and
                  Queer Activism in the 21st Century. Litwin Books, (2012):105–122.</div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id=""><!-- close --></span>Podmore J. Lesbians in the Crowd: Gender, Sexuality and Visibility Along Montreal’s
                  Boul. St-Laurent. Gender, Place and Culture, 8.4 (2001):333–355.</div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id=""><!-- close --></span>Robb S. How the Women’s Building Came to Be [web site]. <a href="http://www.foundsf.org/index.php?title=How_the_Women%27s_Building_Came_To_Be" onclick="window.open('http://www.foundsf.org/index.php?title=How_the_Women%27s_Building_Came_To_Be'); return false" class="ref">http://www.foundsf.org/index.php?title=How_the_Women%27s_Building_Came_To_Be</a>
                  (2012).</div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id=""><!-- close --></span>Samer R. Revising ‘Re-vision’: Documenting 1970s Feminisms and the Queer Potentiality
                  of
                  Digital Feminist Archives. Ada: A Journal of Gender, New Media and Technology,
                  5(2014).</div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id=""><!-- close --></span>Schwartz JM, Cook T. Archives, Records, and Power: The Making of Modern Memory. Archival
                  Science, 2 (2002):14.</div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id=""><!-- close --></span>Schwartz, M., &amp; Crompton, C. Remaking History: Lesbian Feminist Historical Methods
                  in the Digital Humanities. Bodies of Information: Intersectional Feminism and Digital
                  Humanities, 131-56.</div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="coffeehousecommunity"><!-- close -->A Woman's Coffeehouse Community</span> A Woman’s Coffeehouse Community. “Open Community Meeting Tapes” [Cassette Tapes]
                  (1983).</div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="anon"><!-- close -->Anon</span> Anon. The Internet Archive [web site]. <a href="https://archive.org/about/" onclick="window.open('https://archive.org/about/'); return false" class="ref">https://archive.org/about/</a> (2017).</div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="bahr2019"><!-- close -->Bahr 2019</span> Bahr, S. 2019. “'The opposite of lost': IU library claps back at The New Yorker over
                  Sylvia Plath story.” IndyStar.
                  <a href="https://www.indystar.com/story/news/2019/01/11/iu-lilly-library-lost-sylvia-plath-story-isnt-lost/2546031002/" onclick="window.open('https://www.indystar.com/story/news/2019/01/11/iu-lilly-library-lost-sylvia-plath-story-isnt-lost/2546031002/'); return false" class="ref">https://www.indystar.com/story/news/2019/01/11/iu-lilly-library-lost-sylvia-plath-story-isnt-lost/2546031002/</a></div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="bennett2000"><!-- close -->Bennett 2000</span> Bennett JM. <cite class="title inline">‘Lesbian-like’ and the Social History of Lesbianisms.</cite> <cite class="title italic">Journal of the History
                     of Sexuality</cite>, 9 (2000).</div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="boyd2019"><!-- close -->Boyd 2019</span> Boyd, J., 2019. <cite class="title inline">Just Like You Want Me to Be?: Gay and Lesbian Oral History Projects and
                     the Frameworks of Public History.</cite> <cite class="title italic">The Public Historian</cite>, 41(2), pp.269-289.</div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="brooks2019"><!-- close -->Brooks 2019</span> Brooks, James F. 2019. <cite class="title inline">Commemorating Queer History.</cite> <cite class="title italic">The Public Historian</cite>, 41(2),
                  pp.5</div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="browne2010"><!-- close -->Brown, Nash, and Hines 2010</span> Browne, K., Nash, C. J., &amp; Hines, S. (2010). <cite class="title inline">Introduction: Towards Trans
                     Geographies.</cite> <cite class="title italic">Gender, Place &amp; Culture</cite>, 17(5), 573-577.</div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="chenier2010"><!-- close -->Chenier 2010</span> Chenier E. “Hidden from Historians: Preserving Lesbian Oral History in Canada.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Archivaria</cite>, 68 (2010): 247–269.</div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="chenier2015"><!-- close -->Chenier 2015</span> Chenier E. “Privacy Anxieties: Ethics Versus Activism in Archiving Lesbian Oral History
                  Online.” <cite class="title italic">Radical History Review</cite>, 122 (2015):129–141.</div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="chenier2016"><!-- close -->Chenier 2016</span> Chenier E. “Reclaiming the Lesbian Archives.” <cite class="title italic">The Oral History Review</cite>, 43.1
                  (2016):170–182.</div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="cifor2018"><!-- close -->Cifor et al. 2018</span> Cifor M et al. “‘What We Do Crosses over to Activism’: The Politics and Practice of
                  Community Archives.” <cite class="title italic">The Public Historian</cite>, 40.2 (2018):70.</div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="cocciolo2017"><!-- close -->Cocciolo 2017</span> Cocciolo A. “Community Archives in the Digital Era: A Case from the LGBT Community.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Preservation, Digital Technology &amp; Culture</cite>, 45.4 (2017):157–165.</div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="cooper2013"><!-- close -->Cooper 2013</span> Cooper D. “Welcome Home: An Exploratory Ethnography of the Information Context at the
                  Lesbian Herstory Archives.” In: <cite class="title italic">Keilty P, Dean R, eds. Feminist and Queer Information
                     Studies Reader</cite>. Sacremento, Litwin Books, (2013).</div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="corban2014"><!-- close -->Corban 2014</span> Corban RF. “A Genealogy of the Lesbian Herstory Archives: 1974-2014.” <cite class="title italic">Journal of
                     Contemporary Archival Studies</cite>, 1 (2014).</div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="cvetkovich2011"><!-- close -->Cvetkovich 2011</span> Cvetkovich A. “The Queer Art of the Counterarchive.” <cite class="title italic">Los Angeles: ONE National Gay and
                     Lesbian Archives</cite>, (2011).</div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="eichhorn2014"><!-- close -->Eichhorn 2014</span> Eichhorn K. <cite class="title italic">The Archival Turn in Feminism: Outrage in Order.</cite> Philadelphia, Temple
                  University Press. (2014).</div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="fowler2009"><!-- close -->Fowler 2009</span> Fowler N, Abramsohn J. “For Historians and Archivists, Modern Era is a Digital ‘Dark Age’”
                  [web site].
                  <a href="https://www.dw.com/en/for-historians-and-archivists-modern-era-is-a-digital-dark-age/a-4314304                   to moreualization Workflttps://ianmilliga/" onclick="window.open('https://www.dw.com/en/for-historians-and-archivists-modern-era-is-a-digital-dark-age/a-4314304                   to moreualization Workflttps://ianmilliga/'); return false" class="ref">https://www.dw.com/en/for-historians-and-archivists-modern-era-is-a-digital-dark-age/a-4314304
                     to moreualization Workflttps://ianmilliga/</a>. (2009).</div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="ingram1997"><!-- close -->Ingram, Bouthillette, and Retter 1997</span> Ingram GB, Bouthillette A, Retter Y. <cite class="title italic">Queers in Space: Communities, Public Places, Sites
                     of Resistance</cite>. Seattle, Bay Press. (1997).</div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="jacobs2017"><!-- close -->Jacobs and Murgu 2017</span> Jacobs HL, Murgu C. “Questioning the Past and Possible Futures: Digital Historiography
                  and Critical Librarianship.” <cite class="title italic">Journal of Critical Library and Information Studies</cite>,
                  1.1(2017).</div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="jette2019"><!-- close -->Jetté 2019</span> Jetté, M.M., 2019. “Through the Queer Looking-Glass: The Future of LGBTQ Public
                  History.” <cite class="title italic">The Public Historian</cite>, 41(2), pp.6-18.</div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="jimerson2003"><!-- close -->Jimerson 2003</span> Jimerson RC. “Archives and Memory.” <cite class="title italic">International Digital Library Perspectives</cite>,
                  19.3(2003):89–95.</div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="juhasz2006"><!-- close -->Juhasz 2006</span> Juhasz A. “Video Remains: Nostalgia, Technology, and Queer Archive Activism.” <cite class="title italic">GLQ: A
                     Journal of Lesbian and Gay Studies</cite>, 12.2 (2006):319–328.</div>
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar"><a href="#">Preview</a>  |  <span style="color: grey">XML</span> |  <a href="#" onclick="javascript:window.print();" title="Click for print friendly version">Print Article</a></div>
         </div>
      </div>
   </body>
</html>