<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
      <title>[PREVIEW] DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly: </title>
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_screen.css" media="screen" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_print.css" media="print" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" /><style type="text/css">
        #mainContent {
          float: none;
          padding-top: 2em;
          padding-left: 4em;
          padding-right: 4em;
          margin-left: 225px;
           
        }</style></head>
   <body>
      <div id="mainContent">
         <div xmlns:dhqBiblio="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/ns/biblio" class="DHQarticle">
            <div id="pubInfo">Preview<br />Volume  Number 
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar">
               <form id="taporware" action="get">
                  <div><a href="//preview/index.html">Preview</a>
                      | 
                     <a rel="external" href="//vol///%0A                000242.xml">XML</a>
                     
                     | 
                     		   Discuss
                     			(<a href="/dhq/vol///%0A                000242/%0A                000242.html#disqus_thread" data-disqus-identifier="&#xA;                000242">
                        				Comments
                        			</a>)
                     
                  </div>
               </form>
            </div>
            
            <div class="DHQheader">
               
               
               
               
               <h1 class="articleTitle">From Kindling to Kindles: A Review of Matt
                  Hayler, <cite class="title italic">Challenging the Phenomena of
                     Technology: Embodiment, Expertise and Evolved
                     Knowledge</cite> (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan,
                  2015)
               </h1>
               
               <div class="author"><span style="color: grey">Richard
                     Graham</span> &lt;<a href="mailto:richardnvgraham_at_gmail_dot_com" onclick="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('richardnvgraham_at_gmail_dot_com'); return false;" onkeypress="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('richardnvgraham_at_gmail_dot_com'); return false;">richardnvgraham_at_gmail_dot_com</a>&gt;, University of Exeter
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               <span class="Z3988" title="url_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;rft_val_fmt=info%3Aofi%2Ffmt%3Akev%3Amtx%3Ajournal&amp;rfr_id=info%3Asid%2Fzotero.org%3A2&amp;rft.genre=article&amp;rft.atitle=From%20Kindling%20to%20Kindles%3A%20A%20Review%20of%20Matt%20Hayler,%20Challenging%20the%20Phenomena%20of%20Technology%3A%20Embodiment,%20Expertise%20and%20Evolved%20Knowledge%20(Basingstoke%3A%20Palgrave%20Macmillan,%202015)&amp;rft.jtitle=Digital%20Humanities%20Quarterly&amp;rft.stitle=DHQ&amp;rft.issn=1938-4122&amp;rft.date=&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.aulast=Graham&amp;rft.aufirst=Richard&amp;rft.au=Richard%20Graham"> </span></div>
            
            
            <div id="DHQtext">
               
               
               <div id="abstract">
                  <h2>Abstract</h2>
                  
                  <p>"From Kindling to Kindles" is a
                     review of Matt Hayler's <cite class="title italic">Challenging the Phenomena of Technology:
                        Embodiment, Expertise and Evolved Knowledge</cite>
                     (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2015). Hayler's text is an
                     investigation into the current theoretical framework surrounding
                     our contemporary usage of the term
                     "technology." To do this <cite class="title italic">Challenging the Phenomena of
                        Technology</cite>
                     moves through how we define technology, why the same artefacts
                     might be fundamentally different for different users, how this
                     might change our understanding of embodied knowledge, and
                     finally places these issues into a nonhuman context. The book
                     offers exemplary accounts of how to tackle interdisciplinary
                     concerns that relate to so many aspects of our lives.
                  </p>
                  
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p1">1</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p1">There are a number of wide-ranging questions embedded throughout
                     Matt Hayler’s <cite class="title italic">Challenging the Phenomena of Technology:
                        Embodiment, Expertise and Evolved Knowledge</cite>: How do we
                     read? How do we engage with the world around us? What separates
                     experts and amateurs? Can we think about technology from a
                     nonhuman perspective? To answer these questions, Hayler draws on
                     a wide range of research areas and in doing so produces an
                     exemplary interdisciplinary model. One of the main strengths of
                     <cite class="title italic">Challenging the Phenomena of
                        Technology</cite> is that it provides an insight into some of
                     the most contemporary issues currently causing debate in a wide
                     number of disciplines. Hayler’s balanced description of various
                     contexts will introduce readers to a number of discussions
                     occurring behind disciplinary walls and explain why we might
                     want to care about them.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p2">2</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p2"><cite class="title italic">Challenging the Phenomena of
                        Technology</cite>
                     will be of particular interest to Digital Humanities scholars.
                     One of the main thrusts of the book is how pervasive a certain
                     kind of language surrounding technology has become in Western
                     discourse. The boundaries between artificial/natural,
                     organic/augmented, tool/technology, practice/expertise are
                     constantly being redrawn in new ways, but ways that are informed
                     by a complex history. <cite class="title italic">Challenging the
                        Phenomena of Technology</cite> shows that, rather than being a
                     subset of niche concerns, questioning what we mean by technology
                     relates to everything we do. Therefore, I feel that Hayler’s
                     work speaks directly to the Digital Humanities community (both
                     to our big and small tents). Even those researchers on the
                     fringes of the DH community will be accustomed to the kind of
                     discourse that surrounds our self-clarifications and, at times,
                     self-defences. That DH might be about focusing our attentions to
                     new media, digital content, or the use of digital methods
                     inevitably draws up distinctions between "natural" humanities
                     scholarship and newer "technological"
                     departures. <cite class="title italic">Challenging the Phenomena of Technology</cite>
                     seeks to dismantle such a distinction, demonstrating how the
                     "natural" has always been a complex arrangement of constructs.
                     For example, Hayler asks, why should a pen be treated as less
                     technological than a computer? And are either of them in the
                     same technological realm as, say, my microwave or CERN’s Large
                     Hadron Collider? In doing so <cite class="title italic">Challenging the
                        Phenomena of Technology</cite> moves through how we define
                     technology, why the same artefacts might be fundamentally
                     different for different users, how this might change our
                     understanding of embodied knowledge, and finally, it places these
                     issues into a nonhuman context. Its comprehensive coverage of
                     such expansive topics in a book of under 250 pages should be
                     commended. Hayler’s sources may come from a diverse group of
                     disciplines but the narrative is focused and bolstered with
                     contextual awareness.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p3">3</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p3"><cite class="title italic">Challenging the Phenomena of
                        Technology</cite>
                     covers a lot of ground and for that reason this review will not
                     attempt to address every aspect. However, I have attempted to
                     capture the central argument that builds through Hayler’s work,
                     and have arranged the review into five sections that broadly
                     correspond to the five chapters of <cite class="title italic">Challenging
                        the Phenomena of Technology</cite>. The first three sections
                     mainly consist of short summaries, which are important for
                     understanding Hayler’s later arguments. In section three I set
                     out how my theoretical perspective differs from Hayler’s and the
                     ways in which they might be productively compatible. The final
                     two sections of this review attend to what I believe to be the
                     most innovative and stimulating aspects of <cite class="title italic">Challenging the Phenomena of Technology</cite> and therefore
                     include more analysis and suggestions of possible avenues for
                     further development of Hayler’s work.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">One: What is "Technology"?</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p4">4</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p4"><cite class="title italic">Challenging the Phenomena of
                        Technology: Embodiment, Expertise and
                        Evolved Knowledge</cite> aims to do just that: challenge.
                     Challenge our definition of technology, but also any claims to
                     naturalness we might have. The opening chapter outlines various
                     resistances to technology and uses e-reading as a key example.
                     Why have e-readers provoked such resistance?
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p5">5</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p5">Hayler draws on a wide variety of folk phenomenological
                     (non-academic, personal reports), philosophical, and cognitive
                     science arguments. These resistances are then separated into two
                     "flavours": the "romantic: digital technology for reading
                     provides a layer of visceral insulation between us and the
                     sensual world of which printed books are a very pleasant
                     part" and the "scientific concern: e-reading negatively impacts upon
                     our cognition and impoverishes the experience of reading in a
                     quantifiable way"  [<a class="ref" href="#hayler2015">Hayler 2015</a>, 19]. The distinction here is not
                     between the amateur and the academic; Hayler cites various
                     scientific studies that are commonly used in public discourse as
                     well as a number of academic professionals drawing on "romantic"
                     arguments. Although he does not deny the grounded reality of the
                     complaints, Hayler’s perspective is that both sets of arguments
                     are built on shaky ground. The scientific arguments against
                     e-reading are often based on bad leaps of faith, scientism, and
                     the drawing of conclusions from unrelated studies. As is
                     unsurprising for such a young technology, there is real lack of
                     primary research:
                     
                     <blockquote>
                        <p> no study has put anyone in an fMRI, or any other type of machine,
                           with a printed copy of <cite class="title italic">A Tale of Two
                              Cities</cite> and a digital edition to see what’s different,
                           no one has yet compared like for like.  [<a class="ref" href="#hayler2015">Hayler 2015</a>, 32]
                        </p>
                     </blockquote>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p6">6</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p6">This is also unfortunate due to the number of "romantic"
                     arguments made recently against e-reading that too draw on
                     science to anchor their concerns to statements about how the
                     brain functions naturally.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e292">[1]</a>
                     However, the main thrust from the "romantic" camp is that
                     technology "separates us from the
                     world"  [<a class="ref" href="#hayler2015">Hayler 2015</a>, 4]. In
                     response to this assertion, Hayler draws on archaeological and
                     anthropological research that argues that humans have been
                     technologically embedded from our earliest times as a species.
                     In this vein, Hayler builds on the arguments of Timothy Taylor
                     in <cite class="title italic">The Artificial Ape</cite>, arguing that
                     "the
                     idea of humans versus technology is wrong...Technology is at
                     least as critical to our identity as our soft tissues"
                     [<a class="ref" href="#hayler2015">Hayler 2015</a>, 189]. If technology has been central to our evolution as a
                     species and inextricably embedded in a long history of cultural
                     activities, then perhaps we need to interrogate the word
                     "technology". What is it that we "really"
                     mean when we use this word, with either positive or negative
                     connotations? Rather than avoiding this nebulous term, what
                     happens if we develop a new definition of technology, one that
                     helps us better understand the relationships between humans and
                     artefacts? These are the leading questions of the next section
                     of <cite class="title italic">Challenging the Phenomena of
                        Technology</cite>.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Two: A New Definition of Technology</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p7">7</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p7">Hayler’s second chapter outlines a number of existing approaches
                     to defining technology in a concise and clear manner that
                     quickly bring the reader up to speed. <a class="noteRef" href="#d4e340">[2]</a> These contextual
                     frameworks prove useful in Hayler’s later arguments, however
                     their main purpose at this stage is to make a foundational
                     statement from which the main body of the book follows. Hayler
                     argues that:
                     
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>There is no such thing as "technology" by any persuasive
                           definition, nothing we can point to or touch, or describe
                           consistent properties of, particularly in its day-to-day use.
                           This is a problem. It is a remarkably loose term; we might often
                           agree on the objects under discussion – computer: yes,
                           coriander: no – but the specifics of why this might be so are
                           vague. "Technology" is, at best, a consensus description of
                           equipment and practices.  [<a class="ref" href="#hayler2015">Hayler 2015</a>, 60]
                        </p>
                     </blockquote>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p8">8</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p8">This declaration leads to one of the most exciting assertions of
                     <cite class="title italic">Challenging the Phenomena of
                        Technology</cite>: for Hayler, technology is "not a class of
                     objects, but a class of phenomenological experience with several
                     consistent features" [<a class="ref" href="#hayler2015">Hayler 2015</a>, 4]. His placing the emphasis
                     on practice, process, and active encounters rather than on lists
                     of static objects reconceptualises technology in a number of
                     useful ways. To do so Hayler draws on the philosopher of
                     technology Joseph C. Pitt’s statement that "technology is
                     'humanity at work'" [<a class="ref" href="#hayler2015">Hayler 2015</a>, 61]. This allows Hayler to
                     start from, as he puts it, a place of "dramatic inclusivity"
                     [<a class="ref" href="#hayler2015">Hayler 2015</a>, 61] but one that allows us to pay attention to
                     technological "experience" that is so
                     integral to this text. Using this broad focus, Hayler draws up
                     four criteria that are important for understanding technology as
                     a phenomenological encounter. Hayler preempts the
                     counterintuitive nature of his criteria by suggesting that his
                     definition
                     
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>will produce some initially strange, but hopefully illuminating,
                           results; the definition that I want to deploy will see, at least
                           potentially, a book, a hunting dog, and a dancer’s body as
                           technologies, but banish the Large Hadron Collider, an ATM
                           machine, and a microwave from the same category.  [<a class="ref" href="#hayler2015">Hayler 2015</a>, 61]
                        </p>
                     </blockquote>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p9">9</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p9">This is a dramatic warning shot, designed to provoke: how can
                     such a statement be true? Developing after the first chapter’s
                     contextualisation of reactions towards technology and its
                     deconstruction of certain conceptions of naturalness, this kind
                     of statement should not come as such a surprise, yet it
                     initially comes across as illogical. It is therefore a deserved
                     credit to Hayler’s following criteria that lead such strangeness
                     to become a realistic proposal. Not every reader will be
                     convinced, but all will certainly understand why we might want
                     to suggest that a hunting dog is more technological than a
                     microwave. Hayler’s four criteria are as follows:
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="ptext">
                     <ul class="list">
                        <li class="item">Technologies EXTEND our means or ability to accomplish
                           tasks.
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">Technologies are COMMUNAL, existing only in communities of
                           users.
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">Technologies are able to become, if only temporarily,
                           skilfully INCORPORATED into our embodied cognition.
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">Technologies have an effect on their users, they are
                           DOMESTICATING. [<a class="ref" href="#hayler2015">Hayler 2015</a>, 71]
                        </li>
                     </ul>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p10">10</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p10">Through the above criteria, "dance, language, the use of fire"
                     and even "analytic thought" [<a class="ref" href="#hayler2015">Hayler 2015</a>, 109] can be considered
                     technological forms. Hayler’s argument, as becomes clear in his
                     later use of Object Oriented Ontology (OOO), subscribes to a
                     flat ontology. In doing so, techniques and objects can exist on
                     equal grounds as forms of technology. Therefore techniques such
                     as "writing, driving, computing" can be seen as technologies in
                     the same way as "its accompanying device (pen, car, computer)"
                     [<a class="ref" href="#hayler2015">Hayler 2015</a>, 109]. This allows us to escape from a hierarchy of
                     natural vs. artificial or artefact vs. technique. Using this
                     definition, Hayler forces us to pay more attention to context
                     and histories of practice rather than on material distinctions.
                     Applying such a definition to examples can then help us as
                     readers continue to ask what we mean by the word "technology".
                     It is often the most jarring examples that lead to the most
                     productive considerations, moments when Hayler’s definition
                     leads to results that oppose our "common sense" definitions.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  <h1 class="head">Three: How Do Experts See Things
                     Differently?
                  </h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p11">11</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p11">Hayler now moves from his definition of technology to deal
                     specifically with expertise: how the same object can be
                     different to two separate people. Significantly, Hayler wants to
                     portray the interplay between humans and artefacts as distinctly
                     dialogical: he states that artefacts "are both objects and
                     shapers of cognition and perception, [and] they are both moulded
                     in and come to mould our minds" [<a class="ref" href="#hayler2015">Hayler 2015</a>, 119]. For Hayler,
                     objects direct our cognition in various ways whilst at the same
                     time our cognition constrains how those objects exist to us. A
                     main part of Hayler’s assertion is that however I might think
                     about an object and whatever my skill or disposition, there is
                     always a real version of that object that I will never fully
                     understand. In doing so, Hayler draws on Edmund Husserl and
                     Maurice Merleau-Ponty’s phenomenological approach to argue that
                     we can draw closer to an artefact, but that this process will
                     never be complete: "some element must always escape our
                     comprehension" [<a class="ref" href="#hayler2015">Hayler 2015</a>, 119]. Part of this approach appears
                     to develop within a wider <em class="emph">posthumanist</em>
                     context: it is hubris to think that a master carpenter fully
                     comprehends every part of the wood and tools she uses. At the
                     very most, the carpenter might understand the grain,
                     flexibilities, and resistances of the wood better than any other
                     human. Even at this stage the carpenter will never grasp the
                     wood as it <em class="emph">really</em> is. A bacterium,
                     woodworm, or bird will all understand the same wood in ways the
                     carpenter cannot even comprehend. But it is not simply enough to
                     add up all these various interactions the wood might have and
                     draw up a holistic description of the wood that takes all these
                     perspectives into account. For Hayler, the essence of an object
                     will always retreat and can never be fully comprehended. In this
                     context Hayler uses the term <em class="emph">gestalt</em> to
                     describe how we make composites of separate instances of
                     interactions. The more we think we know about an artefact the
                     more fixed our gestalt becomes. These gestalts are
                     simplifications of artefacts: when someone becomes an expert at
                     interacting with certain objects they are reducing its essence
                     to how it relates to them and their specific task. When we fail
                     at a task it is often because our gestalt does not match the
                     actual nature of the objects at hand. Our expert carpenter is
                     surprised less often by their wood and tools in comparison to an
                     amateur, for whom the saw jars and stutters rather than flowing
                     gracefully. Here we might describe their skill as a developed
                     gestalt; the carpenter is not surprised because they have
                     simplified the wood to a certain set of characteristics within a
                     particular context.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p12">12</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p12">Placing this back into a phenomenological context, Hayler uses
                     the term <em class="emph">sensual object</em> to distinguish
                     the personal and incomplete object that the carpenter encounters
                     from the real object of the wood that cannot be fully
                     encountered. It is, in fact, during a skillful sawing action that
                     the wood and tools hide away from the carpenter: a distinction
                     of ready-to-hand that Hayler borrows from Heidegger. Hayler
                     anchors this idea to the theory of metaphor presented by George
                     Lakoff and Mark Johnson in <cite class="title italic">Metaphors We Live
                        By</cite>. In essence, we navigate the world using metaphors
                     at a fundamental level, and to Hayler, when we turn from one
                     artefact to another we often attempt to treat the latter as the
                     former. This is why many struggle with, for example, e-reading.
                     We bring our gestalt, our experiences and expertise from
                     physical codex reading to bear on an artefact that is not the
                     same. It is not that we understood the essence of books or that
                     we fail to grasp the essence of a Kindle, but that trying to
                     metaphorically treat e-readers as new types of paperbacks
                     results in a mismatch. We must avoid being constrained by old
                     metaphors, in language and in practice. But what is expertise
                     anyway? How much knowledge of an artefact is possible? Although,
                     as stated earlier, Hayler argues we cannot fully understand an
                     object, there is a relationship between the user’s gestalt and
                     object itself. He argues that:
                     
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>True expertise must be about experiencing things as closely as
                           possible as what-they-are, not in terms of some other thing; the
                           reliance on metaphor will keep us as amateurs unable to see the
                           true affordances of the artefact that we are working with.
                            [<a class="ref" href="#hayler2015">Hayler 2015</a>, 139]
                        </p>
                     </blockquote>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p13">13</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p13">Here Hayler borrows the term <em class="emph">affordances</em>
                     from psychologist James Gibson. The term describes the
                     opportunities or potentials for particular actions with an
                     object. For example: a handle affords turning whereas a cord
                     affords pulling. An expert therefore is someone whose
                     expectations align in some way with the true affordances of an
                     artefact. Hayler argues that "affordances are real qualities of
                     sensual objects" [<a class="ref" href="#hayler2015">Hayler 2015</a>, 145                     footnote 24]. What intrigues
                     me is what happens when certain sets of affordances that overlap
                     are in conflict. To take an example, we can say that a bench
                     affords sitting: it is smooth, horizontal, and free from
                     traffic. We could also say that the same bench affords
                     skateboard grinds. The affordances are, in fact, very similar.
                     However, the more skateboarders grind on the bench, the less it
                     affords sitting; the surface becomes worn and uncomfortable. To
                     Hayler, affordances are part of sensual objects (created through
                     our interaction) rather than the object on its own terms.
                     However, at what point does the wear from the grinds change the
                     essence of the bench into something new, or is it still a
                     version of its original form. If we are to agree that the bench
                     is now a new bench (i.e. only good for grinds and not for
                     sitting) the distinction of its <em class="emph">real</em>
                     essence becomes subjective (or at least based around the sensual
                     object of the skateboarder). At its core it seems that Hayler’s
                     definition of technology is an attempt to avoid this kind of
                     thinking and to eschew subjectivity.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p14">14</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p14">A similar query arises later in the book when Hayler sets out the
                     theoretical basis for his ontology of objects: on the one hand
                     we have Actor Network Theory (ANT), Bruno Latour, and Peter-Paul
                     Verbeek, and on the other we have Graham Harman and Object
                     Oriented Ontology. Each has an influence on Hayler’s argument
                     but there is an issue where ontologically he must take sides:
                     which is more primary, entities or relations? Hayler states
                     that:
                     
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>the postphenomenology that I’m interested in
                           <em class="emph">does not</em> find its foundation in relations [...] for me,
                           the foundation for this entanglement is actually a radical
                           <em class="emph">division</em> [...] Verbeek, as Latour, accepts
                           that relations do not produce entities out of nowhere, but
                           claims that those entities do not function as actants with
                           essential properties until they enter relations which structure
                           what they are as actants. I want to emphasise the importance of
                           all actants before they interact, what they both bring to and
                           withhold from the table.  [<a class="ref" href="#hayler2015">Hayler 2015</a>, 162]
                        </p>
                     </blockquote>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p15">15</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p15">Hayler’s ontology is based around real objects that consistently
                     surprise us and evade our full understanding. My trepidation
                     however, is that treating entities as having essences prior to
                     any relations might bias these essences as singular. This choice
                     relates back to the overlapping affordances of skateboards and
                     benches. If we want to claim there is a "real hammer" that
                     precedes its interactions with the world, then to me, this
                     singularity can only ever be based on <em class="emph">our</em> (human) version of events. Therefore, I side with the ANT
                     version of events, which places relations at the foundation of
                     its ontology.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p16">16</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p16">Hayler marks out these two positions (OOO vs. ANT) as
                     incompatible. However, I believe there are some significant ways
                     in which an ANT approach is compatible with many of Hayler’s
                     conclusions. In fact I think an ANT reading of Hayler’s
                     perspective enlarges its scope and that switching between these
                     two viewpoints can be productive. I will therefore, in addition
                     to outlining Hayler’s OOO approach, try and reconcile these
                     perspectives, or at least demonstrate how it might not be
                     necessary to adopt either exclusively, in the context of the
                     book’s conclusions.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Four: Technology as Embodied Knowledge</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p17">17</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p17">The final two sections of <cite class="title italic">Challenging the
                        Phenomena of Technology</cite> attach Hayler’s earlier
                     arguments about technology to a pragmatist perspective of
                     knowledge. The argument is that objects are embodiments of
                     knowledge. That is, knowledge is defined as "any stored data
                     that enables repeatable and successful action within an
                     environment"  [<a class="ref" href="#hayler2015">Hayler 2015</a>, 164]. This knowledge lies outside of
                     a human correlationism: it is not simply born out of our
                     relations (what Hayler calls the sensual object or human
                     gestalts) but belongs to "things themselves
                     [...] it’s the real
                     things that know"  [<a class="ref" href="#hayler2015">Hayler 2015</a>, 155]. Drawing on OOO, Hayler
                     argues that all objects have a realness that cannot be fully
                     satisfied through interactions with either humans or other
                     objects. As elaborated above, when I interact with a saw I will
                     never fully grasp its essence, only what is important to me at
                     that time: what becomes my sensual gestalt. The same is true of
                     object-to-object relations; when rainfall encounters a gorge
                     there is an encounter that exchanges information and changes the
                     form of both the rain and the rock. However, the rock has not
                     encountered the essence of the rain and neither has the water
                     encountered the essence of the gorge. Both entities have
                     encountered only the qualities relevant to them in that
                     particular encounter. OOO allows Hayler to argue that nonhuman
                     entities can interact with other nonhuman entities in a variety
                     of ways that involve knowledge, without needing to affirm
                     cognition upon rocks and rain. As Hayler writes: "no two objects
                     ever meet each other as they are, but only as they appear to one
                     another"  [<a class="ref" href="#hayler2015">Hayler 2015</a>, 178]. Hammers and nails have knowledge of
                     one another, but only as they relate to their own actions.
                     Again, knowledge, as Hayler uses the term, is not about hammers
                     having thoughts and feelings but about objects comprising
                     "any
                     stored data that enables repeatable and successful action within
                     an environment"  [<a class="ref" href="#hayler2015">Hayler 2015</a>, 164]. Therefore, the flat top edge
                     of a nail constitutes a kind of knowledge about hammers, or at
                     least enacted data that enables hammers and nails to
                     interact.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p18">18</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p18">Although Hayler agrees with the OOO perspective that we cannot
                     know the real essence of an object, he diverges from Harman (and
                     other OOO proponents) in that he believes we can align our
                     sensual objects (our encounter of an object) closer to the real
                     object through experience and expertise. Therefore, "the way
                     that all objects encounter other objects, <em class="emph">can</em> include a potentially asymptomatic approach,
                     through this needn’t imply direct access"  [<a class="ref" href="#hayler2015">Hayler 2015</a>, 189],
                     where asymptomatic refers to a curve on a graph that gets
                     increasingly closer to a value but never reaches it. In this way
                     Hayler places the emphasis on expertise: objects always escape
                     us but that does not stop experts from aligning their sensual
                     objects close to the real thing. This would account for the
                     successful action of experts. By my understanding this does not
                     just refer to experienced craftspeople but also, due to the
                     posthumanist position of OOO, the repeated erosion of a gorge by
                     a regular pattern of rainfall. The rain does not grasp the
                     essence of the rock but perhaps the action of erosion
                     constitutes knowledge in Hayler’s pragmatic outlook of
                     repeatable and successful action. This brings us to why, even
                     though as stated above I side more with an ANT approach at
                     possible odds with Hayler’s project that prioritises relations
                     over entities, I think the conclusions of <cite class="title italic">Challenging the Phenomena of Technology</cite> still hold
                     true for this alternative outlook. Hayler’s position is open to
                     an outlook that prioritises process. I believe that even if we
                     prioritise relations over entities, much of Hayler’s argument is
                     still persuasive, particularly in the context of distributed
                     knowledge:
                     
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>The expert’s knowledge of, for instance, hammering is partly
                           formed of data inside her brain, but the relevant data is also
                           in the hand and the arm that operate the tool, in the tool
                           itself and its feedback, and in the act of hammering with
                           <em class="emph">this</em> hammer in <em class="emph">this
                              </em>moment in <em class="emph">this</em> milieu [...] experience
                           always prompts new data to draw on, and this tends to strengthen
                           the coherence of sensual gestalt and real object. Such data is
                           always dispersed across the contextualised 4EDS [the umbrella
                           term Hayler uses for cognition which is distributed, extended,
                           embedded, or embodied] soft-assemblage – it is the
                           <em class="emph">technical encounter</em> that knows best, not
                           just an expert human brain  [<a class="ref" href="#hayler2015">Hayler 2015</a>, 194, emphasis in                     original] 
                        </p>
                     </blockquote>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p19">19</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p19">Hayler stresses the changing and individual nature of objects.
                     His emphasis of "<em class="emph">this</em> hammer in <em class="emph">this</em>
                     moment in <em class="emph">this</em> milieu"  [<a class="ref" href="#hayler2015">Hayler 2015</a>, 194] asks us to see
                     technological interactions of objects as specific interactions
                     that generalised critiques of "technology" overlook. Hayler’s
                     structuring of interactions as a coherence of real objects and
                     sensual gestalts helps us understand objects as mysterious and
                     mostly hidden to everything with which they interact. To me
                     however, placing the emphasis on specific encounters that are
                     unique to a particular context where "it is
                     the <em class="emph">technical encounter</em> that knows best"
                      [<a class="ref" href="#hayler2015">Hayler 2015</a>, 194] prioritises the system rather than individual
                     entities. That we might only be able to engage with the sensual
                     objects part of that assemblage explains why systems can behave
                     in such unexpected ways. Perhaps the fact that the knowledge is
                     held in the interaction of these unknowable objects owes credit
                     to Hayler’s argument that each object has a real essence outside
                     of its relations: we cannot fully know the system of
                     interactions because we cannot fully understand the objects at
                     play. Perhaps we might even want to argue that
                     <em class="emph">relations</em> can be described with Hayler’s language of
                     real and sensual objects, aligning gestalts of knowledge, just
                     as productively as <em class="emph">entities</em>. Perhaps such
                     a reading would not lead to an orthodox ANT approach, and
                     instead simply lead Hayler’s method away from Harman and towards
                     a kind of thinking similar to Jane Bennett’s vital materialism
                     [<a class="ref" href="#bennett2010">Bennett 2010</a>].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p20">20</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p20">Whichever way one reads it the conclusion is exciting. The first
                     reading, which supports Hayler’s insistence that entities come
                     first, is useful in various dynamic contexts. An alternative
                     model, which incorporates an ANT or process disposition into
                     Hayler’s OOO-inspired conclusions, also yields interesting
                     results, one that challenges the distinction between entities
                     and relations. This ambiguity sets the stage for the final
                     argument of <cite class="title italic">Challenging the Phenomena of
                        Technology</cite> that I believe is convincing either on its
                     own terms or through an ANT perspective.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Five: The Evolution of Technology</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p21">21</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p21">Hayler’s final section develops his pragmatic distinction of
                     knowledge as embodied in objects by arguing that this knowledge
                     is subject to evolutionary pressures. Hayler traces the roots of
                     this evolutionary epistemology and outlines the modes of thought
                     necessary to treat artefacts as subject to the evolutionary
                     pressures of "<em class="emph">variation</em> (due to
                     mutation), <em class="emph">selection</em> (due to pressures
                     from the environment), and <em class="emph">reproduction</em>
                     (due to an individual’s success)"  [<a class="ref" href="#hayler2015">Hayler 2015</a>, 211]. Using the
                     example of the codex, Hayler argues that books are subject to
                     <em class="emph">variation</em> (for example, mutations
                     such as oversize atlases and pocket editions), <em class="emph">selection</em> (through pressures of the marketplace), and
                     <em class="emph">reproduction</em> (by reprinting
                     successful books and more generally the stabilisation of
                     publishing norms). In this way we can treat the range of
                     possible books as the gene pool and the variety of codices that
                     continue to be printed as the phenotypic expression of that gene
                     pool. The books themselves do not have any agency; they are not
                     trying to survive. However, the environment (in this case
                     humans) is shaping their existence through reproduction of forms
                     that are the best "fit" with that environment. As Hayler
                     expresses it, "evolution is all about repeatable successful
                     action" [<a class="ref" href="#hayler2015">Hayler 2015</a>, 215] which we should remember is his
                     definition of knowledge in a nonhuman context [<a class="ref" href="#hayler2015">Hayler 2015</a>, 164]. The distinction Hayler makes between gene pools and
                     offspring as a partial product of that gene pool is quite
                     persuasive in the context of objects having a real but
                     unknowable essence. I think it is more than metaphorical to say
                     that in this context the unexpected nature of epigenetics can
                     echo very well the unexpected ways in which objects can change
                     and react in new contexts, while retaining a concrete, or at
                     least traceable, identity.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p22">22</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p22">To project this version of artefacts as embodiments of knowledge
                     developed through evolutionary pressures into a truly nonhuman
                     context, Hayler draws on the work of Henry Plotkin. In <cite class="title italic">Darwin Machines and the Nature of
                        Knowledge</cite>, Plotkin uses stick insects as an example of
                     embodied knowledge. The body of the stick insect, unbeknownst to
                     the insect, embodies knowledge of its surroundings. Hayler
                     argues, through Plotkin, "the stick insect’s body therefore
                     possesses knowledge of an aspect of the world far greater than
                     its own mind is capable of"  [<a class="ref" href="#hayler2015">Hayler 2015</a>, 217]. Placing this in
                     an OOO context, Hayler argues that even though it seems like the
                     body of the insect has knowledge of the plants it lives in, it
                     is only ever a partial knowledge. The body of the insect (or the
                     species as a whole) has knowledge that only relates to the way
                     its predators' eyes function: the rest of the environment
                     recedes. Nor does the knowledge held in the environment fully
                     satisfy the stick insect’s existence, which is a benefit of an
                     OOO outlook. We must be sympathetic to the depths that we will
                     never understand; we cannot simply use descriptive
                     characteristics about the insect or environment to claim that we
                     fully understand them. The knowledge that humans, branches, or a
                     stick insect’s body hold is never exhaustive. To Hayler,
                     knowledge only ever concerns sensual gestalts. This then allows
                     a way of seeing a whole host of individuals, animals, objects,
                     artefacts, and technologies as "knowing" about the world around
                     them while maintaining their ability to surprise and be
                     surprised by interactions. This also brings us back to one of
                     the opening examples of <cite class="title italic">Challenging the
                        Phenomena of Technology</cite>: what is going on when people
                     reject Kindles, even if they "work" just as well as a codex?
                     Knowing Hayler’s argument, we can say that the evolution of the
                     codex reflects a hard-won journey and one that embodies a vast
                     amount of knowledge concerning reading practices and our
                     relationship with the written word. Disconnected from this
                     history, e-readers have a different (and more recent) set of
                     affordances and characteristics. Kindles have had less time to
                     adapt and reflect their environment and therefore our sensual
                     gestalt does not align with the real essence of the artefact.
                     Nor does the knowledge embodied in the Kindle adequately reflect
                     its users. Hayler argues that we do not <em class="emph">know</em> e-readers yet, but also, in equal measure, that
                     e-readers are yet to know us well enough either. Hayler
                     articulates that:
                     
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>We may feel uncomfortable with the idea that codices possess
                           knowledge rather than simply store it, but this only reflects a
                           prejudice surrounding the use of the word "knowledge" as a
                           narrow band of human experience, rather than seeing that band as
                           a subset of something that we share with the world that we have
                           emerged from and remain in complex concert with.  [<a class="ref" href="#hayler2015">Hayler 2015</a>, 225]
                        </p>
                     </blockquote>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p23">23</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p23">This posthumanist stance allows human beings to be humble towards
                     the world, and in particular towards technology. I also think
                     that this conclusion, although developed out of an engagement
                     with OOO, does not require us to reject models that place
                     interactions before entities. Much of what Hayler describes as
                     "knowledge" develops through interactions. To my mind, although
                     many of these leave traces (the shape of an insect’s body),
                     there are also types of knowledge that emerge and dissipate
                     without leaving a permanent trace. Read in a digital context, in
                     which more of our world is governed algorithmically, I think
                     there are countless times in which rapid change is the norm,
                     rather than stable entities. Increasingly our interactions with
                     technology rely on knowledge as <em class="emph">emergent</em>
                     successful actions rather than <em class="emph">repeatable</em>
                     ones. If we read Hayler’s conclusions concerning situated
                     knowledge in this context I think the results are very
                     productive.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p24">24</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p24">Throughout my reading of <cite class="title italic">Challenging the
                        Phenomena of Technology</cite> I frequently tried to apply
                     Hayler’s method to various examples. In particular I kept
                     relating Hayler’s model to my own research: that of web search
                     engines. I found this a particularly interesting test case,
                     particularly as it fits Hayler's criteria of a technology. Using
                     Google regularly extends my ability to accomplish tasks,
                     functions through community, is incorporated into my cognition,
                     and domesticates me in various ways. I can also divide Google
                     along the lines of sensual vs. real object. I have knowledge of
                     a sensual gestalt (the data, links, and ranking that takes
                     place) but not the real essence of the process. Everything so
                     far works with Hayler’s definition. The trouble is, Google is in
                     no way a singular or static object. Google is all the varied
                     contexts in which vast datasets are used, the engineers
                     employed, and the vast network of users that change the ranking
                     through daily use. Google search is less like a single
                     technology and more like a coordinated emergent response from a
                     number of different elements that cannot be fully predicted.
                     Google search results are localised and personalised to each
                     user, their ranking reassessed with every query, and they are
                     organised through sets of algorithms that are altered and
                     revised constantly.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e744">[3]</a> Even
                     the engineers are not fully in control as the searches and other
                     usages create patterns measured by potentialities rather than
                     firm predictions. The way this network changes can, I think, be
                     described and elaborated using Hayler’s framework very usefully.
                     However, its usefulness lies in the ways it describes processes
                     rather than specific objects. Considering search engines, where
                     can we draw the boundaries around the technology? Is each
                     algorithm a separate and interlocking technology; each engineer,
                     each user? Results change second-by-second in a way that I think
                     differs from the evolution of codices in more than simply speed.
                     Any set of criteria that draws boundaries too firmly around
                     objects is going to misrepresent this kind of technological mode
                     that is becoming increasingly ubiquitous. This is why I think
                     Hayler’s conclusions are valuable beyond a commitment to the OOO
                     project. Because of the evolutionary context, knowledge is
                     described as dynamic and emergent, as Hayler puts it: "all
                     things never meet one another as they are, always reducing and
                     approximating, always escaping and surprising one another"
                      [<a class="ref" href="#hayler2015">Hayler 2015</a>, 231]. In doing so Hayler’s definition works both
                     for "traditional" technologies or ones which might seem to
                     demonstrate a more stable sense of identity, <em class="emph">and</em> newer technological modes or systems that seem
                     harder to define. What if we were to describe
                     <em class="emph">relations</em> in terms of sensual and real objects? What
                     if we argue that an algorithm has a sensual gestalt of a
                     particular dataflow; a dataflow that is obviously real but, due
                     to its speed and the colossal number of contexts in which it
                     becomes meaningful, can only ever be considered through partial
                     knowledge? Perhaps Hayler would see such attempts as a
                     misappropriation of his method, but regardless, the kind of
                     model he presents allows for new ways of theorising complex
                     technological issues. Not only does <cite class="title italic">Challenging the Phenomena of Technology</cite> allow us to
                     conceptualise technology in a more nuanced manner but it does so
                     by incorporating usage and context. As Hayler argues in his
                     conclusion:
                     
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>whilst we may catch an object’s whatness in glimpses through
                           coherence, all that we can truly rely on remains the equipment’s
                           ‘thatness,’ not what makes it what it is, but simply that it
                           exists to us at this moment as this thing [<a class="ref" href="#hayler2015">Hayler 2015</a>, 233]
                        </p>
                     </blockquote>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p25">25</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p25">Hayler’s method allows him to capture traditional attitudes
                     towards technology whilst incorporating a temporal and
                     contextual attitude that is key to our emerging digital
                     landscape. In doing so, <cite class="title italic">Challenging the
                        Phenomena of Technology</cite> excels at historicising our
                     technological circumstances and is convincing in its argument
                     that redefining our contemporary definition of technology is
                     important not only for scholarship but for navigating the
                     world.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p26">26</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p26"><cite class="title italic">Challenging the Phenomena of Technology</cite> is
                     most successful in its sensitivity to context and in surveying a
                     number of crucial questions that various disparate disciplines
                     are addressing from different angles. Hayler provides us not
                     only with a specific set of proposals concerning technology, but
                     with an outline of some of the most pressing contemporary
                     debates and arguments being put forward in a variety of research
                     areas. <cite class="title italic">Challenging the Phenomena of
                        Technology</cite> is important reading for those
                     in the humanities, cognitive sciences, philosophy, and digital
                     humanities. It is of particular importance for those researchers
                     wanting an exemplary account of how to tackle interdisciplinary
                     concerns, and how to address them sensitively by putting forward
                     arguments that will provoke a wide range of stimulating and
                     productive responses.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
            </div>
            
            <div id="notes">
               <h2>Notes</h2>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e292"><span class="noteRef">[1]</span>
                  A movement that Romanticism scholar Steven E. Jones
                  associates with "Neo-Luddism" (see Steven
                  E. Jones, <cite class="title italic">Against Technology: From the Luddites to
                     Neo-Luddism</cite> and Nicols Fox, <cite class="title italic">Against the Machine: The Hidden Luddite Tradition in
                     Literature, Art, and Individual Lives</cite>).
               </div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e340"><span class="noteRef">[2]</span> The clarity of the section, in particular
                  the differentiation between the approaches of similar
                  thinkers, is excellent. The chapter gives short summaries of
                  the approaches of Leo Marx ("Technology: The Emergence of a
                  Hazardous Concept"), Bernard Stiegler (<cite class="title italic">Technics and Time</cite>), Martin Heidegger ("The
                  Question Concerning Technology"), Jacques Ellul
                  (<cite class="title italic">The Technological Society</cite>), José
                  Ortega y Gasset (<cite class="title italic">Meditación de la
                     Técnica</cite>), Paul DeVore (<cite class="title italic">Technology: An Introduction</cite>), and Michel Foucault
                  ("Technologies of the Self").
               </div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e744"><span class="noteRef">[3]</span> For
                  more detail, see Steven Levy, <cite class="title italic">In The Plex:
                     How Google Thinks, Works and Shapes Our Lives</cite> (p.
                  61) in which he interviews engineering staff at Google about
                  the process of constantly altering algorithms.
               </div>
            </div>
            <div id="worksCited">
               <h2>Works Cited</h2>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="bennett2010">
                     <!-- close -->Bennett 2010</span> Bennett, Jane.
                  <cite class="title italic">Vibrant Matter: A Political Ecology of
                     Things</cite>. Durham, North Carolina: Duke University
                  Press.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="fox2002">
                     <!-- close -->Fox 2002</span>  Fox, Nicols. <cite class="title italic">Against the Machine: The Hidden Luddite Tradition in
                     Literature, Art, and Individual Lives</cite>. Washington,
                  D.C.: Island Press, 2002.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="hayler2015">
                     <!-- close -->Hayler 2015</span>  Hayler, Matt. <cite class="title italic">Challenging the Phenomena of Technology: Embodiment,
                     Expertise and Evolved Knowledge</cite>. Basingstoke: Palgrave
                  Macmillan, 2015. 
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="jones2006">
                     <!-- close -->Jones 2006</span>  Jones, Steven E. <cite class="title italic">Against Technology: From the Luddites to
                     Neo-Luddism</cite>. New York: Routledge, 2006.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="levy2011">
                     <!-- close -->Levy 2011</span>  Levy, Steven. <cite class="title italic">In
                     The Plex: How Google Thinks, Works and Shapes Our
                     Lives</cite>. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster.
               </div>
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar"><a href="#">Preview</a>  |  <span style="color: grey">XML</span> |  <a href="#" onclick="javascript:window.print();" title="Click for print friendly version">Print Article</a></div>
         </div>
      </div>
   </body>
</html>