<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
      <title>[PREVIEW] DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly: </title>
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_screen.css" media="screen" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_print.css" media="print" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" /><style type="text/css">
        #mainContent {
          float: none;
          padding-top: 2em;
          padding-left: 4em;
          padding-right: 4em;
          margin-left: 225px;
           
        }</style></head>
   <body>
      <div id="mainContent">
         <div class="DHQarticle">
            <div id="pubInfo">Preview<br />Volume 14 Number 4
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar">
               <form id="taporware" action="get">
                  <div><a href="//preview/index.html">Preview</a>
                      | 
                     <a rel="external" href="//vol/14/4/000494.xml">XML</a>
                     
                     | 
                     		   Discuss
                     			(<a href="/dhq/vol/14/4/000494/000494.html#disqus_thread" data-disqus-identifier="000494">
                        				Comments
                        			</a>)
                     
                  </div>
               </form>
            </div>
            
            <div class="DHQheader">
               
               
               
               
               <h1 class="articleTitle lang en">Decolonizing “The Digital” in the Classroom:
                  Reflections on the Intersection of Colonial Latin American Art History and Digital
                  Art History Pedagogy
               </h1>
               
               
               <div class="author"><span style="color: grey">Lauren G. Kilroy-Ewbank
                     </span> &lt;<a href="mailto:lkilroyewbank_at_gmail_dot_com" onclick="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('lkilroyewbank_at_gmail_dot_com'); return false;" onkeypress="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('lkilroyewbank_at_gmail_dot_com'); return false;">lkilroyewbank_at_gmail_dot_com</a>&gt;, Independent Art Historian
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               <span class="Z3988" title="url_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;rft_val_fmt=info%3Aofi%2Ffmt%3Akev%3Amtx%3Ajournal&amp;rfr_id=info%3Asid%2Fzotero.org%3A2&amp;rft.genre=article&amp;rft.atitle=Decolonizing%20The%20Digital%20in%20the%20Classroom%3A%20Reflections%20on%20the%20Intersection%20of%20Colonial%20Latin%20American%20Art%20History%20and%20Digital%20Art%20History%20Pedagogy&amp;rft.jtitle=Digital%20Humanities%20Quarterly&amp;rft.stitle=DHQ&amp;rft.issn=1938-4122&amp;rft.date=2020-12-15&amp;rft.volume=14&amp;rft.issue=4&amp;rft.aulast=Kilroy-Ewbank&amp;rft.aufirst=Lauren G.&amp;rft.au=Lauren G.%20Kilroy-Ewbank"> </span></div>
            
            <div id="DHQtext">
               
               
               <div id="abstract">
                  <h2>Abstract</h2>
                  
                  
                  <p>This essay explores the challenges of using “the digital,” both
                     scholarly and pedagogically, for understanding and analyzing colonial Latin American
                     art. It argues that digital art history (DAH) tools and methods offer new ways to
                     think about the non-neutrality of how we access, collect, and understand information
                     discovered online. Specifically, it focuses on responses to a questionnaire and the
                     development of a collaborative Omeka project (involving students) to consider how
                     knowledge is produced in the digital environment. It reflects on issues of digital
                     and visual epistemology, digital visuality, the ontology of art history,
                     accessibility, and neocolonialism, and how these topics have been broached with
                     undergraduate students in a class focused on Spanish colonial art.
                  </p>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div id="abstract">
                  <h2>Abstract</h2>
                  
                  
                  <p>Este ensayo explora los desafíos de usar “lo digital,” tanto académica como
                     pedagógicamente, para comprender y analizar el arte colonial latinoamericano.
                     Sostiene que las herramientas y los métodos de la historia del arte digital (DAH)
                     ofrecen nuevas formas de pensar sobre la no neutralidad de cómo accedemos,
                     recopilamos, y entendemos la información descubierta en línea. Específicamente, se
                     centra en las respuestas al cuestionario y en el desarrollo de un proyecto
                     colaborativo Omeka (con estudiantes) para considerar cómo se produce el conocimiento
                     en el entorno digital. Reflexiona sobre temas de epistemología digital y visual,
                     visualidad digital, ontología de la historia del arte, accesibilidad y
                     neocolonialismo, y cómo estos temas han sido abordados con estudiantes en una clase
                     enfocada en el arte colonial.
                  </p>
                  
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               <div class="counter"><a href="#p1">1</a></div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p1">“[D]igital media is not neutral: It impacts the represented
                  information and the ways society interprets it”
                  [<a class="ref" href="#kalay2008">Kalay 2008</a>, 1].
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Introduction: Colonial Latin American Art and The Digital</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p2">2</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p2">Digital visual media, such as images and videos, form an inescapable cornerstone of
                     our lived experience. For those of us in higher education, the digital is altering
                     not only how and what we research but also how and what we teach. In a similar vein
                     as other specializations, the study of colonial Latin American art is being
                     transformed.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e218">[1]</a> Art historians, finely attuned to the visual world and the
                     meaning-making processes informing it, seem uniquely positioned to engage with and
                     critique the digital realm that we increasingly inhabit and to teach digital, visual
                     literacy.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p3">3</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p3"> Despite art historians’ possible role to play in shaping and framing the digital
                     world, there is still an ambivalence about what the digital turn has to offer art
                     history. An assessment of the impact of “the digital,” and more specifically the
                     digital humanities (DH) and digital art history (DAH), on the field of art history
                     reveals that there are those who believe the digital turn has the potential to
                     positively disrupt it (e.g., <a href="#honig2018">Honig 2018</a>) and those who
                     feel it has the potential to problematically disturb it (e.g., <a href="#bishop2015">Bishop 2015</a>). Regardless of where an individual’s
                     position falls on this spectrum, the digital is here to stay, and it is reinventing
                     art history and the manner in which we access, engage with, asses, and frame visual
                     culture. One wonders, as Nuria Rodríguez-Ortega (<a href="#rodriguez2013b">2013b</a>) has, if Donald Preziosi (<a href="#preziosi1991">1991</a>)
                     could have imagined the impact the digital would have on how we “rethink art history,” a suggestion he first made about the art-historical
                     discipline in the wake of post-structuralist and post-modern critiques of art and
                     the
                     (im)possibility of stable meaning.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p4">4</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p4">For all these reasons, it is important that we equip ourselves with the ability to
                     understand how the digital frames or reframes our understanding of visual culture
                     and
                     to effectively critique it. As art historians know all too well, framing devices
                     construct a visual rhetoric, one that creates certain “epistemological and methodological assumptions,” in the words of Elli
                     Doulkaridou [<a href="#doulkaridou2015">2015</a>, 69]. Something as seemingly
                     simple as substituting, in class, a high-resolution gigapixel panoramic 360° photo
                     of
                     the church of San Pablo de Ocongate in Peru [<a class="ref" href="#mavcor2018">MAVCOR 2018</a>] for a flat
                     megapixel one can alter perception, experience, and belief about the object or space
                     that the digital image indexes. The digital turn has thus prompted shifts in how we
                     see the world and the ways in which we consume and produce knowledge. In the digital
                     environment in which we increasingly live, learn, and, for those of us in the
                     classroom, teach, it has become clear that we must consider digital technology as
                     epistemology [<a class="ref" href="#schilling2014">Schilling 2014</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#rodriguez2009">Rodríguez-Ortega 2009-2010</a>]. Digital media is, as Yehuda Kalay states, not
                     neutral, but creates, shapes, and disseminates knowledge in different ways than a
                     hardbound book, a DVD, or a lecture delivered in a classroom. Similarly,
                     Rodríguez-Ortega advises us to be mindful about how we perceive of the digital realm
                     — not as a “neutral, innocuous space that delivers
                     information” but as a “cultural, political, and
                     ideological venue”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#rodriguez2013a">Rodríguez-Ortega 2013a</a>, 132].<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e273">[2]</a>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p5">5</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p5">For these reasons it is imperative to think about not only the technological tools
                     needed to engage in digital practices and meaning-making, but also the critical tools
                     needed to think about what content to produce and how to produce it. I would add to
                     this that we also need the critical tools to think about, assess, and communicate
                     what and how we experience and interact with (i.e. what we consume) online. Even
                     those of us who do not intend to make DAH tools or projects will encounter and use
                     them, and most if not all art historians now employ digitized images for our teaching
                     and research. The very way these digitized images are aggregated and framed has the
                     potential to shift our field — ontologically, epistemologically, and
                     pedagogically.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p6">6</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p6">This essay grapples with some of the complexities that the digital poses for those
                     of
                     us who teach and research colonial Latin American art. It asks a number of questions:
                     In what ways can DAH methods and tools, as well as digitized visual materials, help
                     us to think more critically or differently about visual culture? What challenges
                     exist when working with digital images, tools, and methods?<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e283">[3]</a> To explore these
                     questions, I draw on responses to a questionnaire and my own pedagogical experiences.
                     The questionnaire gathered information about how others in the field of colonial
                     Latin American art history approach the digital in their pedagogy and research. These
                     responses serve as a launching point for a broader discussion of the ramifications
                     of
                     DAH pedagogy and research as it relates to the visual culture of colonial Latin
                     America.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e289">[4]</a> Also serving as a springboard to wrestling with these issues are
                     my own experiences with DAH pedagogy and the challenges it has presented to both me
                     and my students when discussing and analyzing colonial Latin American art. In
                     particular, I describe a course project that asks students to build digital
                     exhibitions about Spanish colonial art using the content management system (CMS)
                     called Omeka [<a class="ref" href="#omeka2018a">Omeka Team 2018a</a>]. Discussions about metadata and the use of
                     digital images prompted the students and me to consider issues of digital and visual
                     epistemology, digital visuality and storytelling, art historical nomenclature, the
                     ontology of art history, digital colonialism and neocolonialism, accessibility, and
                     labor — all in the course of a semester. These considerations aided students in not
                     only thinking more critically about colonial Latin American art, but also developing
                     digital and multimodal literacy with Web 2.0 technology.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e294">[5]</a> In focusing on these pedagogical experiences, I hope to
                     highlight some of the greater implications of the digital world for the study of
                     colonial Latin American visual culture and pay heed to how DAH pedagogy can both
                     disrupt and disturb art history.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Gathering Data from a Questionnaire</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p7">7</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p7">To collect information from other scholars teaching and researching the visual
                     culture of colonial Latin America, I distributed a questionnaire in English to the
                     Association of Latin American Art (ALAA) listserv.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e309">[6]</a>The survey gathered data anonymously with both quantitative and
                     qualitative questions to develop a mixed-methods approach.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e312">[7]</a> It asked a series of questions about how people
                     teach or research colonial Latin American art using DAH tools or resources, and
                     whether they use DAH projects like Smarthistory or tools like Omeka, and if so, how.
                     It compiled information about how long a participant has taught, the subjects of
                     courses focused on colonial Latin American visual culture, and the orientation of
                     these classes towards DAH or DH. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p8">8</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p8">Fourteen individuals responded to the survey, offering a small, yet useful
                     <em class="emph">n</em> to analyze the role of the digital in teaching and researching
                     about colonial Latin American visual culture.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e321">[8]</a> The
                     open-ended answers varied from a few words to lengthy paragraphs. Despite this
                     variability, the responses prompted thought-provoking reflection on the role of
                     digitized and digital art history among those of us focused on the visual culture
                     of
                     colonial Latin America. The collected data revealed a number of important concerns,
                     among them (1) the broad way in which individuals define, understand, and use
                     “the digital” when researching or teaching about colonial Latin
                     American visual culture; (2) the perception that digitized and digital art history
                     have the potential to advance the study of Latin American art and to complicate or
                     decenter the canon, even if the specific ways in which this might occur seem vague
                     and undetermined; (3) the importance of access to high-resolution images, archival
                     materials, and scholarship to ease financial burden and collaborate across
                     international borders; and (4) the need for more digital resources or projects,
                     despite the large number of perceived challenges, which include the limitations of
                     digital technologies, the time needed to learn digital tools and skills, and the
                     reliability and trustworthiness of these tools and projects. The remainder of this
                     essay explores these ideas in connection to pedagogical strategies and experiences
                     with digital art history in an undergraduate class focused on colonial Latin American
                     visual culture.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Using and Defining Digitized and Digital Art History</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p9">9</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p9">The general consensus from the responses on the questionnaire is that working with
                     digital tools and digitized visual materials offers clear benefits to any scholar
                     or
                     student of art history, regardless of their specialization.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e336">[9]</a> These benefits include access to materials from around the
                     globe, the use of high-resolution images for study, the opportunity to create a
                     visual archive of images currently split among international collections, or the
                     invitation to engage with materials more slowly from anywhere at any time. The
                     qualitative responses detailed the various ways respondents felt that DAH had
                     impacted (or could impact) their research, teaching, the field of colonial Latin
                     American art, and art history more generally. Many suggested that DAH provides new
                     ways of interacting with data, helps us to ask new types of questions, and shifts
                     how
                     we understand visual culture. However, most respondents mentioned that they were
                     unsure what these interactions or shifts might look like and whether they were
                     sustainable. When asked if they themselves are active in DAH or DH, 42.9% responded
                     yes, 35.7% maybe, and 21.4% no. Written responses suggested that some participants
                     were simply unsure if what they were doing “counted” as DAH; for
                     example, several wondered if using a university’s CMS in their colonial Latin
                     American art classes meant they had familiarity with or practiced DAH. Others noted
                     their reticence to answer “yes” because they were unsure how to define DAH
                     altogether, noting that they could not align themselves with it if they do not know
                     what it is, and if art historians more generally cannot agree how to define it.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p10">10</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p10">Respondents relied on a wide range of digital tools and methods for their research,
                     but this use was more limited pedagogically.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e348">[10]</a> 69.2%
                     answered that their classes are not oriented towards DAH; remaining responses were
                     split between yes and maybe. A follow-up question asked participants to describe
                     those classes that foregrounded, or at least incorporated to some extent, digital
                     methods and tools. Several individuals incorporate textual analysis, mapping, image
                     annotation, or the creation and curation of online projects (such as the development
                     of an online exhibition using Omeka). Most commonly, though, respondents linked
                     students to digital image repositories, essays, and videos from sites like Vistas
                     [<a class="ref" href="#leibsohn2015">Leibsohn and Mundy 2015</a>], Smarthistory [<a href="#smarthistory2018">2018</a>], and The Metropolitan Museum’s Heilbrunn Timeline (2000–2018). These
                     answers further highlighted the confusion (and in some cases frustration) about how
                     to define or understand DAH or what constitutes doing it or using it in the classroom
                     setting.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p11">11</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p11">Digital Art History is one aspect of the Digital Humanities, and both have affected
                     the development of the humanities more broadly. Those engaged with DAH cross
                     disciplinary boundaries, incorporating not only art history and computer science,
                     but
                     also media studies and library and information science. As the questionnaire
                     responses highlighted, defining DH or DAH is challenging, as there is no clear
                     consensus around how to understand either [<a class="ref" href="#kilroy2018">Kilroy-Ewbank 2018</a>]. <a class="noteRef" href="#d4e361">[11]</a> Complicating matters
                     further is that digital (or digitized) visual materials, image repositories, and
                     databases are often not considered synonymous with DAH. Several scholars have
                     articulated the difference between digitized art history and DAH (e.g., <a href="#drucker2013">Drucker 2013</a>; <a href="#rodriguez2013a">Rodríguez-Ortega 2013a</a>, <a href="#rodriguez2019">2019</a>; <a href="#bishop2015">Bishop 2015</a>; see also <a href="#zorich2012">Zorich
                        2012</a>; <a href="#baca2013">Baca and Helmreich 2013</a>; <a href="#fletcher2015">Fletcher 2015</a>; and <a href="#drucker2015">Drucker, Helmreich, Lincoln, and Rose 2015</a>). For them, creating and using
                     digital repositories that “simply aggregate data and/or
                     images” are examples of digitized art history [<a class="ref" href="#rodriguez2013a">Rodríguez-Ortega 2013a</a>, 130], whereas research that uses computational analysis (e.g., GIS mapping,
                     data visualization, topic modeling, network analysis, data mining) is an example of
                     DAH. I am reticent to separate digitized art history entirely from digital art
                     history, however. The digitization of materials and their manipulation — cropping,
                     whitening, framing, straightening, and deciding what to include or exclude — affect
                     how we understand what we are seeing, advancing certain epistemological arguments,
                     a
                     position Barbara Mundy and Dana Leibsohn also address in “Digital
                     Resources: The State of Digital Research on the Visual Culture of Spanish
                     America” (<a href="#mundy2017">2017</a>), which provides a state of
                     the field as well as describes potential issues with accessibility, collaboration,
                     and the effects of the digital on ways of seeing (see also <a href="#rodriguezortega2018">Rodríguez-Ortega 2018</a>, <a href="#rodriguez2019">2019</a>).
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p12">12</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p12">It is more valuable perhaps to distinguish between digital inflection and digital
                     centeredness. The former uses certain digital technologies to create something that
                     is similar to existing modes of writing or teaching; for instance, asking students
                     to
                     reflect on an artwork in a blog post. Digital centeredness suggests foregrounding
                     digital technologies to generate new types of questions, methods, or ideas that more
                     traditional ones cannot or have not; for instance, creating 3D models [<a class="ref" href="#hoobler2018">Hoobler et al. 2018</a>], crowdsourcing to match print sources with colonial
                     paintings [<a class="ref" href="#pessca">PESSCA</a>], or mapping the locations of artworks described in
                     archival documents [<a class="ref" href="#rodriguez2018">Rodriguez, Ferrer, Choe, and Anderson 2018</a>].
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p13">13</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p13">Most questionnaire respondents insinuated that the digital turn offers important
                     benefits for pedagogy, research, and the very manner in which we determine what
                     constitutes colonial Latin American visual culture, even if what DAH is remains
                     amorphous. The increase, especially in the past decade, of projects revolving around
                     colonial Latin American art supports this claim that DAH is beneficial (see also <a href="#mundy2017">Mundy and Leibsohn 2017</a>). These projects offer
                     specialists and students alike the ability to learn about Latin American visual
                     culture and its history in multimodal ways (such as with photographs, video, 3D
                     reconstructions, 360-degree panoramas, text, music, and data visualizations), and
                     even exposure to less canonical (e.g., Vistas), partial, or destroyed objects (e.g.,
                     Digital Aponte), architecture, and primary sources related to the visual, material
                     record.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p14">14</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p14"> A few survey responses indicated the importance of reaching out to different publics
                     — scholars, students, anyone interested in colonial Latin American art, and those
                     individuals who might develop interest in it as a result of searching the Web.
                     Projects like Vistas, Digital Códice Mendoza [<a class="ref" href="#codex2014">Codex Mendoza 2014</a>], Project on
                     Engraved Sources of Spanish Colonial Art [<a class="ref" href="#pessca">PESSCA</a>], and Digital Aponte
                     [<a class="ref" href="#rodriguez2018">Rodriguez, Ferrer, Choe, and Anderson 2018</a>] also suggest the myriad ways that DAH projects can
                     engage various types of audiences. The Digital Códice Mendoza, for instance, is
                     bilingual (Spanish and English) and allows users to zoom in and pan across
                     high-resolution scans of the entire codex, and offers transcriptions of the text as
                     you hover over it. It is of interest to art historians, but also historians,
                     paleographers, archaeologists, and so forth, and is accessible to anyone with the
                     internet.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p15">15</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p15">A couple respondents mentioned that DAH has the ability to challenge entrenched ideas
                     about the field of art history, and the role of colonial Latin American art within
                     it. For example, one noted the importance of nimble online projects like Smarthistory
                     as alternatives to textbooks that are not updated regularly. Smarthistory is, for
                     lack of a better term, a not-for-profit open educational resource that focuses on
                     world art. It is the result of collaboration among more than 400 art historians. New
                     essays and videos can be added continuously and information updated regularly,
                     helping to dispel the notion that art history — and colonial Latin American art by
                     extension — is fixed.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e443">[12]</a>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p16">16</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p16">The idea that digital art history projects can reach wider audiences and disrupt the
                     field of colonial Latin American art history is one that warrants greater discussion.
                     Here, I would like to offer a few reflections and discussion points about how
                     incorporating digital art history practices into undergraduate classes about colonial
                     Latin American visual culture has encouraged better digital critical thinking by
                     encouraging students to think about art history’s ontological issues and
                     nomenclature, descriptive metadata, and issues of colonialism (or neocolonialism),
                     as
                     well as the ways in which digital images have the potential to reframe how we
                     understand the visual culture of this region and time period.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e451">[13]</a>
                     
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Art History’s Ontological Issues and Descriptive Metadata</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p17">17</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p17">Art history has long been about classifying art based on style and iconography. One
                     could argue that for much of its existence, the field has been focused on cataloging
                     works of art and architecture to create, as much as possible, neat taxonomies. If
                     we
                     think back to the origins of the discipline, the art historians who shaped the
                     formation of art history in the late eighteenth, nineteenth, and early twentieth
                     centuries, from Johann Winckelmann, Aby Warburg, and Erwin Panofsky to Alois Riegl,
                     Hienrich Wöfflin, and George Kubler, created classification systems and vocabularies
                     still used today to discuss form and subject matter. They are systems largely
                     centered around and stemming from European art.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e463">[14]</a> In particular there has
                     been a privileging of Italian Renaissance art and the stylistic terms used to
                     describe art from the Italian Peninsula between 1400 and 1600, what Svetlana Alpers
                     (<a href="#alpers1979">1979</a>) and others refer to as Italocentrism. Many
                     of these stylistic labels, such as Renaissance or Baroque, have also become temporal
                     descriptors, denoting a time period (e.g., <a href="#maravall1986">Maravall
                        1986</a>) and sometimes a place, rather than a representational mode.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p18">18</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p18">The nomenclature of art history developed to describe European art has been appended
                     to the visual culture of areas outside of Europe, including those areas, such as
                     Latin America, in which Europeans invaded and colonized people and introduced new
                     visual systems. Colonial Latin American art calls into question where we have
                     centered the canon, the terminology we use to discuss art, and even the spaces and
                     places where art is found. Periodizations describing European artistic trends do not
                     transplant neatly (nor should they) to the Americas, creating what Ananda
                     Cohen-Aponte [<a href="#cohenaponte2017">2017</a>, 69] notes is one of many
                     “unresolved issues” facing scholars who study colonial
                     Latin American visual culture. Cohen-Aponte points to the “innocuous terminology” [<a href="#cohenaponte2017">2017</a>, 69]
                     applied to viceregal art, seeking to problematize it in an attempt to decolonize art
                     history. Jeanette Peterson has similarly discussed how a term such as Renaissance
                     “advances or impedes our ability to analyze and understand
                     visual culture from the viceregal period” [<a href="#peterson2008">2008</a>, 322]. She asks, for instance, how do we categorize an “early seventeenth-century ivory figure of the Mexican Virgin of
                     Guadalupe made by Chinese carvers working in the Philippines, transported across
                     the Pacific in the Manila galleon fleet bound for Acapulco and ultimately destined
                     for American and European consumers?” [<a href="#peterson2008">2008</a>, 331–332]. Do we simply note it as Renaissance or the more generic
                     sixteenth century? Despite the challenges with applying these terms to colonial Latin
                     American visual culture, it has proven difficult to omit them entirely, even in
                     instances when they do not fit comfortably (e.g., <a href="#sullivan1996">Sullivan 1996</a>; <a href="#peterson2008">Peterson 2008</a>, 322).
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p19">19</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p19">Where does digital art history fit into these discussions about nomenclature and the
                     ontology of art history? If we were to reconceptualize Peterson’s question about the
                     ivory figure of Guadalupe from the point of view of DAH, we might ask, how could we
                     translate this object, one which resists easy classification, into tidy,
                     “objective” metadata? After all, many DAH projects necessitate
                     the creation of metadata about images. While not speaking specifically to the
                     potential challenges and issues of inputting descriptive metadata in a digital
                     environment, much of Peterson’s discussion, as well as Cohen-Aponte’s, revolve around
                     similar issues.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p20">20</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p20">I would argue that there are DAH processes and ideas that can assist scholars and
                     students to think more critically about the terminology used to describe colonial
                     Latin American art in the digital environment. If one of the main reasons for
                     engaging with the digital is to access information, as the questionnaire responses
                     all noted, then how we input, organize, aggregate, and source that data is
                     fundamentally significant. My own experiences with introducing students to metadata,
                     as one step towards producing a collaborative online exhibition on Omeka, has
                     stimulated important and thought-provoking conversations about how we describe,
                     analyze, frame, and discuss colonial Latin American art.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e518">[15]</a> It helped students to
                     develop digital literacy and to grasp more fully the non-neutrality of visual
                     resources, DAH projects, and the Web more generally. It also increased their
                     awareness of how we access information and how the presentation of that information
                     affects what we know or think we know, how we see, and where we locate knowledge
                     about colonial Latin American visual culture.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p21">21</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p21">To create their online exhibition with Omeka, students must learn about metadata.
                     In
                     the process of creating metadata, students must weigh the eurocentric (and colonial)
                     bias of art historical nomenclature and terminology. Metadata is data about data to
                     help create an archive or catalogue for retrieving information. It enables us to
                     locate, evaluate, and use specific types of visual images (including video). Omeka
                     uses Dublin Core elements to create metadata, and these elements include title,
                     subject, description, creator, source, publisher, date, format, type, identifier,
                     and
                     coverage [<a class="ref" href="#omeka2018b">Omeka Team 2018b</a>].<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e527">[16]</a> Most of the information in these fields are what some might call
                     “indisputable information,” or objective information akin to
                     what we expect to find in a caption or exam slide identifications. For example, the
                     metadata for a photographic reproduction of Manuel de Arellano’s <cite class="title italic">Virgin of Guadalupe</cite>
                     <a class="noteRef" href="#d4e539">[17]</a> from
                     1691 at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art could read as follows: 
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>
                           <br />title: Virgin of Guadalupe <br />subject: Madonnas (using the Library of
                           Congress Thesaurus for Graphic Materials) or perhaps Mary, Blessed Virgin, Saint —
                           Apparitions and miracles (using the LCSH, or Library of Congress Subject Headings)
                           <br />author: Manuel de Arellano <br />description: A painting of the Virgin of
                           Guadalupe, one of the most venerated Marian advocations in the world. It
                           replicates the original tilma worn by Juan Diego. <br />creator: LACMA <br />source:
                           LACMA <br />publisher: LACMA <br />date: 1691 (or the date of the photograph)
                           <br />format: oil on canvas (or the type of digital file) <br />identifier: a URL to
                           the LACMA collection page <br />coverage: Mexico
                        </p>
                     </blockquote> Beyond these metadata
                     fields, users can also create tags to help identify and locate items. For Arellano’s
                     painting, these might include “painting”, “sacred”, “Marian imagery”,
                     “seventeenth century”, and so forth.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p22">22</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p22">Deciding what to write in each field can be complicated, and tougher still when it
                     becomes clear that this information that seems objective is actually a fiction of
                     objectivity. Many metadata descriptions are subjective. As several scholars remark,
                     “‘objectivity’ is defined by consensus, not by authority.
                     Metadata needs to be a part of that consensus-building process”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#nilsson2004">Nilsson, Naeve, and Palmér 2004</a>, 248]. For example, when entering tags about an item
                     into the Dublin Core, what someone decides to include or exclude impacts how this
                     item is discovered and engaged with in a digital environment. This is also the case
                     when asked to summarize the content of the item in the description. Arellano’s <cite class="title italic">Virgin of Guadalupe</cite> could be described in any number of
                     ways. This is not solely an issue about quality control, but also whose voice (or
                     voices) gets to be heard.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p23">23</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p23">Descriptive metadata is thus a crucial component for how we access and even analyze
                     visual artifacts. Yet descriptive metadata is indexed with words that must be input
                     by people who bring their own interpretative lens to the process. Murtha Baca
                     describes the inherent challenges to this process, and the problems it can pose for
                     creating “objective” metadata. In her words, 
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>Anyone familiar with art information knows that often the subject
                           matter or theme of a work of art is not reflected at all in its title. . . . I
                           can only find them [images] if the descriptive terms . . . have been applied to
                           them by a human being who has looked at an image, interpreted the file, the
                           visual information, and other available data, and made the decision to apply
                           these data values to it [<a href="#baca2002">2002</a>, 34].
                        </p>
                     </blockquote>
                     But herein lies one of several challenges: What does this descriptive data look like?
                     What terminology do we include or omit? Who decides what is important data to be
                     indexed? In a specialization like colonial Latin American art history, a field filled
                     with scholars actively critiquing the problematic terminology used to classify and
                     analyze visual culture, how do we generate objective, consistent descriptive
                     metadata?
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p24">24</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p24">This question is repeatedly posed in my classes focused on the visual culture of the
                     Spanish Americas. Early on in the courses, I ask students to create metadata (using
                     the Dublin Core fields) for the open chapel murals of the convento of San Nicolás,
                     Actopan, in Hidalgo, Mexico. This low-stakes activity, completed on paper in teams,
                     helps them learn about Dublin Core elements before they actually complete their main
                     course project on Omeka. They need to fill in the fields for title, subject,
                     description, creator, source, date, format, identifier, and coverage.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e613">[18]</a> The results
                     reveal to students the challenges with standardizing metadata and with using art
                     historical terminology developed to describe European art primarily. For instance,
                     for the title, most students write overly generalized descriptive titles (e.g.,
                     “Murals,”
                     “Open Chapel,” or “Murals with Christian Subject
                     Matter”). Each field presents its own challenge to students, but it is
                     the topic of what to write for the creator that stimulates the greatest (and most
                     passionate) debate.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p25">25</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p25">Almost every student struggles with what to write in the creator field, with
                     descriptors ranging from “Anonymous artist” and
                     “People” to “Indigenous artist(s)” and
                     “Subjugated Artist.” Students read Carolyn Dean and Dana
                     Leibsohn’s “Hybridity and Its Discontents” (<a href="#dean2003">2003</a>), which generally sparks a heated discussion about
                     how we talk about who produced colonial Latin American art and how we describe it.
                     Students have not come to a consensus about what word or phrase is best to use, and
                     by the end of class some students are visibly frustrated, confused, or even angry.
                     One student noted in a written reflection that she felt “lied
                     to” about the superficial objectivity of information in image captions, or
                     in this case, with metadata found online.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e650">[19]</a> She elaborated further that the
                     way metadata is presented gives us the impression that it is objective, suggesting
                     it
                     is indisputable, but now she realized that the personal biases we have inform the
                     production of metadata.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p26">26</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p26">In the following period, I ask students to create tags of the same image, and they
                     have ranged from “Last Judgment”, “polychromy”, and “mendicant art” to
                     “bright”, “damaged”, and “early modern”. This generates another
                     reflective moment in the class about the usefulness of tagging, but also the
                     limitations and potential problems of indexing images more generally. The discussion
                     eventually turns to the possibility of social tagging, a common practice on social
                     media sites like Tumblr and Flickr (and even among museum sites like the Brooklyn
                     Museum). Many students have noted that social tagging might circumvent some of the
                     problems associated with the controlled vocabulary used commonly for metadata (like
                     the Library of Congress [LoC] subject headings). With social tagging, more voices
                     could be represented, and in different languages, providing more opportunities to
                     find images like the Actopan open chapel. The general idea of social tagging
                     certainly can aid in overcoming some of the limitations of controlled vocabularies
                     or
                     the “trickiness” of metadata fields, even if it creates its own
                     challenges, such as too many tags, incorrect tags (e.g., misspelled words), or
                     inaccurate tags (see <a href="#chai2007">Chai, Zhang, and Jin 2007</a>; <a href="#menard2009">Ménard 2009</a>).<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e684">[20]</a> This
                     user-generated tagging has been dubbed as “folksonomy,” or
                     language created by “the masses” which in this case constitutes
                     user-generated tags [<a class="ref" href="#peters2009">Peters 2009</a>, 1–7]. Despite the potential
                     limitations of social tagging, many museums have adopted the practice as a way to
                     further democratize museums and make museums more user-friendly [<a class="ref" href="#alioto2017">Alioto 2017</a>]. The Brooklyn Museum’s <cite class="title italic">enconchado
                        biombo</cite> with the Siege of Belgrade and Hunting Scene, for example,
                     currently has forty-four user-generated tags that range from the general (e.g.,
                     “screen”) to the specific (“oars”).<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e708">[21]</a> By
                     engaging in practices and discussions about metadata and tagging, students develop
                     an
                     awareness for the ways in which a single word alters meaning, and in some cases
                     completely reframes how we understand an object or space, such as the Actopan open
                     chapel, or allows users to locate information on the Web.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e714">[22]</a>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p27">27</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p27"> This exercise not only prompts reflection and critique about metadata and art
                     historical nomenclature, but also reveals some of the limitations of DAH in the
                     process. As one student in this class stated, “if we can’t agree
                     [on] what to write in most of these [Dublin Core] elements, then how will that
                     affect how people locate our materials?” Another noted that she felt she
                     would have an easier time with “inputting an image of
                     Michelangelo’s Sistine Chapel but it is really hard to create clear information
                     about some [colonial] Mexican art.” Yet another student’s response is
                     telling of how important these thorny questions and considerations are: “[E]ven if we can’t agree on what to write [for the metadata], we
                     still need to move forward. . . . Otherwise, people might not even know it exists
                     if they don’t go to college or read books.” I believe what this student was
                     hinting at is the same idea posed by Mark Turin in his essay on “The Devil in the Digital”: the notion that much of what many people learn
                     today is “mediated through the digital. If something [is] not
                     discoverable through an online search or a digital catalogue, it could appear to
                     not exist at all” [<a href="#turin2015">2015</a>, 125.] These
                     students have determined some of the challenges of DAH. Many DAH projects rely on
                     metadata, and metadata is created by people, with all of their biases and
                     irrationalities. They had honed in on the very humanness of the digital
                     humanities.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Digital Colonialism and the Digital Divide</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p28">28</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p28">Can the metadata we create about colonial Latin American objects be a form of digital
                     colonialism? This is a question raised on several occasions in my classes. Metadata
                     produces knowledge in the online environment, shaping how people relate to and
                     understand Latin American visual culture. If the information that we create
                     perpetuates colonialist discourse, overlooks the diversity of voices that lay claim
                     to this cultural heritage, or simplifies the information so as to become
                     anachronistic, then there is the risk of participating in acts of neocolonialism.
                     In
                     this complex digital world in which we live then, how do we responsibly create
                     digital content without engaging in digital or technological colonialism? What
                     ethical considerations are involved in the production of knowledge in the digital
                     environment? And what does this look like for those of us who teach and research the
                     visual culture of colonial Latin America?
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p29">29</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p29">When I first developed this project, and as students continued to learn about Omeka
                     and the Dublin Core elements for their course project, students decided that it would
                     be useful if everyone in the team relied on the LoC Subject Headings (LCSH) and
                     Classification for specific elements, such as creator. The LCSH are frequently used,
                     not only in the U.S. but also internationally, and are considered a more traditional
                     classification system. I initially agreed with the students’ decision to proceed
                     accordingly. However, as became clear to myself and students, even a quick scan of
                     the LCSH reveals that they can unknowingly perpetuate colonialist, biased, and racist
                     discourse. For instance, to familiarize students with the LCSH, I asked students to
                     look at how monographs about Spanish colonial art incorporated them in the front
                     matter.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e768">[23]</a> An
                     examination of five recent monographs dedicated to the visual culture of
                     post-conquest sixteenth-century Mexico included the LCSH “Indians
                     of Mexico,” often with further subject headings attached such as “Indians of Mexico — ethnic identity,”
                     “Indian art,” or “Indians of Mexico —
                     Missions — History — 16th century.” The terms Indigenous or First Nation do
                     not appear, and often the specific ethnic group or groups are omitted from LCSH
                     unless the monograph is specific to one of them (and if the term exists at all). The
                     use of terminology like “Indian art” is thus vague and reductionistic, but also
                     reifies the colonialist discourse that so many postcolonial and decolonial thinkers
                     have attempted to alter. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p30">30</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p30">One way in which it is possible to rectify some of these imbalances and problems is
                     to do what the University of Alberta’s Decolonizing Description Working Group (DDWG)
                     has done, and what other institutions, such as the John Carter Brown Library, are
                     seeking to do.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e790">[24]</a> The DDWG note that their aim is “to investigate, define
                     and propose a plan of action for how UAL can more accurately, appropriately, and
                     respectfully represent Indigenous peoples and contexts through our descriptive
                     metadata practices”
                     [<a class="ref" href="#farnel2017">Farnel et al. 2017</a>]. As they describe, “appropriate
                     subject access and descriptive practices are a social justice issue and a moral
                     imperative.” They provide examples of the transformations they have made to
                     subject headings used in metadata, such as switching “Abused
                     Indian children,” the LCSH, to “Abused Indigenous
                     children.” In class, students have seemed excited about the possibility of
                     such a project, especially the notion of descriptive metadata practices as they
                     relate to social justice issues, and how this might alter how publics access and
                     understand information they encounter on the Web. One student commented that she
                     “never had thought about these things before, like how racist
                     or gendered metadata could be. I’d really never thought about metadata at
                     all.” She reflected that the components of the Omeka project had even
                     caused her to rethink what she sees on her personal social media accounts (like
                     Instagram and Facebook) and YouTube.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p31">31</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p31">The process of creating this course project raises the question of how we can be
                     mindful of not replicating colonialism in new ways. As discussed above, the process
                     of metadata creation seems simple enough on the surface, but in reality is a more
                     complex venture. As Roopika Risam advises, we must be wary of the violence that
                     occurs in “discursive forms,” such as “reproducing colonial influences in the production of digital knowledge and
                     centering epistemologies and ontologies of the Global North . . . which in turn
                     decenters those of Indigenous communities and the Global South” [<a href="#risam2018">2018</a>, 2]. For those of us who practice art history, we
                     must be cognizant of how metadata — and digital tools and projects beyond this — has
                     the ability to act as a neocolonial dynamic, and one that situates the Global North
                     as “the site of knowledge production.”<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e831">[25]</a>
                     
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Access and the Digital Divide</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p32">32</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p32">Access to materials, whether to digital photographs (or videos) or to archival or
                     scholarly materials about colonial Latin American visual culture, impinges upon what
                     and how we teach and research. High-resolution images are essential for teaching and
                     research, and more than half of the survey’s respondents mentioned the need for their
                     greater availability. Among the many reasons increased accessibility is needed,
                     respondents listed the high cost of travel and the many international collections
                     that now possess colonial Latin American objects, as well as the lack of high-res
                     images in repositories like ArtStor or Bridgeman Images. For the latter, there is
                     also a fee to acquire them. Moreover, as the academy continues to rely on adjunct
                     labor with absurdly low pay, the need for free, open access to materials was noted
                     as
                     imperative. One response indicated that with greater access to objects and places
                     that are less well known (if at all) the conversations around colonial Latin American
                     art could also noticeably shift.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p33">33</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p33">Besides access to high-resolution digital images, participants noted that certain
                     digital tools or projects also could bypass pay-walled journals with costly
                     subscriptions or academic presses that sell materials at high costs, all of which
                     are
                     largely inaccessible without access to a university library. As one respondent noted,
                     DAH projects about Latin American visual culture challenge how and where knowledge
                     is
                     stored; rather than solely in academic journals or printed books, DAH projects have
                     the potential to remove burdensome financial costs, to provide free access to anyone
                     untethered to a university system, and to allow for more collaboration across
                     international borders.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p34">34</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p34">While access to more visual and textual materials was noted as a priority for
                     researching and teaching about Latin American visual culture, respondents also noted
                     that digitization initiatives and DAH projects have important limitations. One
                     respondent worried about the implications of a project’s obsolescence. Several
                     commented on the issue of collections (visual or archival) that do not have the funds
                     or equipment to digitize their materials, or individuals who do not receive funding
                     to produce and maintain a project online. Their concern is that research agendas and
                     general trends in the field could therefore be determined on what is and is not
                     available digitally. Mundy and Leibsohn (<a href="#mundy2017">2017</a>) agree
                     that a canon of Latin American visual culture has formed around what has been made
                     more available in the digital domain. This is also true for printed texts, such as
                     those digitized for Google Books. Any library that has not provided access to Google
                     Inc. will have considerably less traffic, which affects current and future research.
                     This could then profoundly alter the production of knowledge about Latin American
                     colonial history and art, as well as the cultural heritage of the many peoples and
                     countries who have a connection to it. In my viceregal art class, this was certainly
                     the case. Students tended to rely primarily on sources that could be found online,
                     such as e-books through the university’s library portal, Google Books, the Getty
                     Research Portal, or the John Carter Brown Library.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p35">35</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p35">Open access to knowledge and to visual materials are important, and the immediacy
                     they afford us has the potential to upset problematic aspects facing the academy
                     (such as budget cuts, less time to travel, and the increase in adjunct labor) and
                     the
                     destruction or loss of cultural heritage. But who gets to grant this access? And
                     should all knowledge and imagery be made more accessible? Risam (<a href="#risam2018">2018</a>) and Afanador Llach (<a href="#afandador2019">2019</a>) rightly remind us that the notion that information is and should be
                     free is an assumption of the Global North, one that does not necessarily accord with
                     Indigenous communities of the Global South. Even universal access to the Web is, as
                     Rodríguez-Ortega states, a myth [<a href="#rodriguez2013a">2013a</a>, 131; see
                     also <a href="#rodriguezortega2018">2018</a>]. A huge portion of the world’s
                     population is still without access to the internet, and it is worth reflecting how
                     the digital practices we engage in could potentially further this digital divide.
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p36">36</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p36">The issue of access is also one of language. English is the lingua franca of the Web,
                     which can be another barrier for anyone who does not know or use English [<a class="ref" href="#afandador2019">Afandador Llach 2019</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#rodriguez2013a">Rodríguez-Ortega 2013a</a>, 131]. It can deepen the digital divide. Many DAH
                     projects centered around colonial Latin American art are in English, though there
                     are
                     also examples of bilingual projects (e.g., Digital Códice Mendoza) that offer
                     excellent models for moving forward. As students in my class have wondered, what
                     attempts have been made or can be made to sidestep the perpetual dominance of the
                     Global North as gatekeepers to knowledge? Collaboration, as noted in the
                     questionnaire responses and among students, seems to offer an appealing solution to
                     how we can ensure greater accessibility and perspectives.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Collaboration, Image Design and Manipulation, and the (In)Visibility of
                     Labor
                  </h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p37">37</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p37">Final issues that warrant discussion are collaboration, image design and
                     manipulation, and the labor involved in creating digitized materials or DAH projects.
                     In the classes on viceregal art described above, each team crafts their own Omeka
                     exhibition, with the team designing a theme and an introductory statement that frames
                     each individual’s entries.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e884">[26]</a> Students are graded on both components, as well as the feedback
                     they offer to their team members. As noted above in the metadata discussion, there
                     are steps that students must learn before they create these online exhibitions. They
                     need to understand how to create metadata, as well as to determine how to source
                     images in the public domain or take their own photographs, upload images as items,
                     create and arrange pages, and write for diverse publics [<a class="ref" href="#kilroy2017a">Kilroy-Ewbank 2017a</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#kilroy2017b">Kilroy-Ewbank 2017b</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#kilroy2018">Kilroy-Ewbank 2018</a>]. It requires scaffolding of smaller assignments from the
                     semester’s beginning.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p38">38</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p38"> After our discussion about metadata and how to create it, another assignment asks
                     teams to decide on their exhibition’s theme after visiting a local museum collection
                     of Spanish colonial art, such as LACMA’s. Students are asked to photograph their
                     chosen objects that will form the core of their individual component. Before they
                     observe objects on display at the museum, I initiate a conversation about what these
                     photographs could or should look like, how many they might take, and whether the
                     photos might need to be “corrected” or manipulated in some
                     capacity. This conversation usually begins with quizzical looks. As one student later
                     reflected, “I’ve never been asked before [in an art history
                     class] to consider how I take photos or what I might need to do to make them look
                     beautiful.” This discussion inevitably returns us to the importance of how
                     we frame or reframe art, how digital images shift the production of knowledge and
                     our
                     understanding of colonial Latin American art, and how the choices we make to show
                     or
                     not to show specific aspects of an object or building can alter how someone
                     understands it. We watch a Smarthistory video to discuss how the visual choices made
                     in it might affect how we understand a specific work of art and how the visuals
                     create an argument. <a class="noteRef" href="#d4e902">[27]</a> On occasion, it has also raised
                     thought-provoking discussions about labor, both visible and invisible, that broached
                     larger issues involved in digitized and DAH, namely how we assign credit for the work
                     being done. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p39">39</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p39"> To provide a brief example, one team framed their exhibition around sacred imagery.
                     One student chose Arellano’s <cite class="title italic">Virgin of Guadalupe</cite> to
                     probe localized sacred imagery specifically. At LACMA, he brought his expensive
                     camera and took dozens of photographs in the manner of Smarthistory’s Steven Zucker,
                     the student’s cited model [<a class="ref" href="#zucker2018">Zucker 2018</a>]. He not only took photographs
                     of the entire painting but numerous details, as well as photographs of the painting
                     from the side and in relation to objects displayed near it, from far away within the
                     gallery space, with visitors in front of the painting, and in black-and-white. The
                     student either already knew or learned how to use image manipulation software like
                     Adobe Photoshop because his resulting images also included callouts, highlights,
                     color correction, complicated cropping, and straightening.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p40">40</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p40">During the peer review process, this student’s component was met with both wonder
                     and
                     anxiety by his fellow teammates. They were concerned that his images were of such
                     high quality so as to make their own individual essays look less legitimate or less
                     serious. Most students took photos on their smartphones and had not manipulated them;
                     they were blurry, dark, and crooked, and some had not captured portions of the object
                     itself. The team member with high-quality photographs offered to share his expertise
                     but wondered if the time he spent helping his teammates to improve their resulting
                     digital images would negatively impact his own project because he would have less
                     time to focus on it. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p41">41</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p41">In the end, the process prompted an unexpected but important conversation about how
                     digitized images affect our perceptions of digital projects and about the labor
                     involved in creating them. I was reminded of Daniela Bleichmar’s discussion of
                     colonial Latin American art and visual epistemology, or “the role
                     of visuality as a way of knowing, and the process of observation, collecting,
                     representation, and circulation that were integral to the production of
                     knowledge” [<a href="#bleichmar2015">2015</a>, 240]. Pairing
                     Bleichmar’s essay with the work they were doing in class proved especially
                     generative, with students finding compelling parallels between processes and projects
                     of the past with those in their digital present. Importantly, it also encouraged
                     students to revisit online projects that we had discussed in class to think
                     critically about how the material is presented and how this creates a digital and
                     visual argument. It also stimulated a great deal of dialogue about the need for more
                     accessible high-resolution images of colonial Latin American visual culture, a point
                     that the questionnaire’s respondents repeatedly emphasized.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p42">42</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p42">Another important point the above example illuminates is the labor involved in
                     digitization, whether of books or images, or in digital work, such as working
                     collaboratively. A great deal of labor goes uncited, unnoticed, as has been addressed
                     more recently by many working in the Digital Humanities (e.g. <a href="#keralis2016">Keralis 2016</a>; <a href="#graban2019">Graban, Marty,
                        Romano, and Vandergrift 2019</a>]. In her written reflection, a student pointed
                     out that the invisibility of this labor calls to mind the invisibility of labor used
                     to create the art and architecture of the sixteenth-century Spanish Americas. Even
                     when the creator of digital content is known, such as the photographer who took
                     certain photos and made them available on Flickr Commons, there is a great deal of
                     labor that might go unaccounted for. Image manipulation can be time consuming, and
                     to
                     get it “just right” varies depending on the creator. Individuals
                     responsible for digitizing materials in museums, archives, or libraries, whether for
                     an institution’s website (such as The Metropolitan Museum of Art or Mexico’s Archivo
                     General de la Nación) or a large corporate entity (such as Google Books) are almost
                     never named. Crowdsourcing, for projects like PESSCA or the recent ALAA digital art
                     history resources page, is not free or visible labor, as a recent blog post on the
                     Getty Iris also mentions [<a class="ref" href="#deines2018">Deines, Gil, Lincoln, and Clifford 2018</a>].<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e955">[28]</a> The
                     concern of my student, who offered to share his photoshopping expertise, about his
                     time and labor raised this issue on a micro-scale within the classroom.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">A Final Reflection</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p43">43</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p43">“Creating metadata and making an [Omeka] exhibit were totally new
                     experiences for me. . . . Both processes made the art [of the Spanish Americas]
                     far more accessible to me and help[ed] me develop better critical thinking skills
                     about what I see online. . . . They also made me feel uncomfortable because I
                     think my generation just assumes all stuff online is true, even when teachers tell
                     us it isn’t. But now I kinda get it.” This statement, in a student’s final
                     reflection, sums up much of what I have been discussing here and the relationship
                     between the digital, colonial Latin American art, and pedagogy. As is clear from this
                     class project, digital art history can disturb and disrupt how students approach
                     colonial Latin American art. As I hope this essay demonstrates, while the digital
                     turn offers many positive ways in which we can rethink and reframe art history and
                     specifically the visual culture of colonial Latin America, it seems mindful to be
                     wary of the notion that it can create a false perception of a techno-utopia in which
                     all creators and users are equal, and information is always readily accessible and
                     objective.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Acknowledgments</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p44">44</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p44">I dedicate this essay to Linda Rodriguez, who passed from this life too soon. She
                     offered excellent feedback on this essay early on, for which I am so grateful. I also
                     thank Hannah Alpert-Abrams, Clayton McCarl, and the two DHQ peer reviewers for their
                     helpful feedback. Any errors are my own.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p45">45</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p45">This essay was written in the spring and summer of 2018.</div>
                  
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
            </div>
            
            <div id="notes">
               <h2>Notes</h2>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e218"><span class="noteRef lang en">[1] I alternate between the terms “art” and “visual
                     culture” with full understanding that there are important differences
                     between them. For the sake of space, I do not unpack the manifold meanings of
                     either term.</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e273"><span class="noteRef lang en">[2] See also Rodríguez-Ortega
                     2018.</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e283"><span class="noteRef lang en">[3] Conversations with
                     Beth Harris and Steven Zucker, the founders of Smarthistory.org, have been
                     influential on my own thinking about digital art history pedagogy. See also <a href="#harris2015">Harris and Zucker 2015</a>.</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e289"><span class="noteRef lang en">[4] The questionnaire asked general questions about digitized and
                     digital art history, teaching, and Omeka, as well as about the open-educational
                     resource Smarthistory. Originally, this essay also addressed a case study of using
                     the production of Smarthistory videos as a model for collaborative DAH pedagogy
                     and practice. However, because of the limitations on length for this essay, the
                     discussion of Smarthistory has been omitted, as have the questionnaire responses
                     about it. This data will be used for a separate essay to be published
                     elsewhere.</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e294"><span class="noteRef lang en">[5] For a useful discussion
                     of Web 2.0 and the ontology of the digital, see <a href="#evens2012">Evens
                        2012</a>.</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e309"><span class="noteRef lang en">[6] In hindsight, the
                     questionnaire should have also been written in Spanish and distributed on other
                     listservs. ALAA is a U.S.-based association but with an international
                     reach.</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e312"><span class="noteRef lang en">[7] Quantitative
                     questions provided basic information in a yes/no/maybe format. Each participant’s
                     qualitative responses were also analyzed using thematic analysis (coding of
                     written text into themes).</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e321"><span class="noteRef lang en">[8] Most participants have been
                     teaching for at least six years (more than 60%), and 38.5% for more than ten. The
                     types of classes people teach vary from undergraduate surveys on colonial Latin
                     American art and architecture, to smaller classes focused on a region or specific
                     century and undergraduate or graduate seminars on a specific theme (such as
                     portraiture in the Americas or eighteenth-century Mexican painting).</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e336"><span class="noteRef lang en">[9] When asked if DAH
                     tools and methods offer new approaches to teaching or researching the art of
                     colonial Latin America, almost all respondents answered yes (76.9%). 23.1%
                     answered maybe.</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e348"><span class="noteRef lang en">[10] Responses describing the impact of
                     the digital on research were the most varied and detailed, indicating the numerous
                     ways in which information is searched, retrieved, collected, and analyzed. Most
                     commonly, respondents use museum websites to source images and access digitized
                     archival materials. Beyond these, respondents listed the importance of general
                     Google searches, and the use of specific Google tools like Scholar and Books, as
                     well as Wikipedia, Academia.edu, Zotero, Dropbox, Videoconferencing, spatial and
                     textual analysis, spreadsheets, and social media (e.g., Twitter).</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e361"><span class="noteRef lang en">[11] I would
                     also argue, as others have before me, that soon the “digital” will be dropped
                     from digital art history [<a class="ref" href="#hohensee2018">Hohensee 2018</a>]. Rodríguez-Ortega’s essay
                     (<a href="#rodriguez2019">2019</a>) also notes that special journal
                     volumes on DAH will likely no longer be published.</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e443"><span class="noteRef lang en">[12] A series of recent blog posts on Smarthistory expand on
                     this very idea [<a class="ref" href="#hohensee2018">Hohensee 2018</a>].</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e451"><span class="noteRef lang en">[13] These classes
                     include Spanish Colonial, Latin American (1492–present), and Global Renaissance
                     art.</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e463"><span class="noteRef lang en">[14] Matthew Lincoln has also made
                     this point (<a href="#lincoln2014">2014</a>).</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e518"><span class="noteRef lang en">[15] While most
                     questionnaire respondents used (or at least knew of) Smarthistory, few used Omeka
                     in any of their classes. 42.9% use Smarthistory in their classes. Only 7.7%
                     employed Omeka. One participant noted that she uses it herself but had not yet
                     introduced it to students. The two respondents who did incorporate Omeka asked
                     students to create digital exhibitions of artworks.</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e527"><span class="noteRef lang en">[16] Dublin Core is centered around fifteen
                     “core” elements that were created in an attempt to
                     standardize metadata by providing specific standards for inputting data across
                     fields.</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e539"><span class="noteRef lang en">[17] For the image, see <a href="https://collections.lacma.org/node/220044?parent=589011" onclick="window.open('https://collections.lacma.org/node/220044?parent=589011'); return false" class="ref">https://collections.lacma.org/node/220044?parent=589011</a>.</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e613"><span class="noteRef lang en">[18] For
                     explanations of each of these fields, see Omeka Team 2018b.</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e650"><span class="noteRef lang en">[19] Students were asked to write a short,
                     written reflection after each class period.</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e684"><span class="noteRef lang en">[20] For more on the challenges of
                     creating collaborative metadata in the classroom, see Richardson 2020.</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e708"><span class="noteRef lang en">[21] To see the image, its metadata,
                     and social tags, visit <a href="https://www.brooklynmuseum.org/opencollection/objects/207337" onclick="window.open('https://www.brooklynmuseum.org/opencollection/objects/207337'); return false" class="ref">https://www.brooklynmuseum.org/opencollection/objects/207337</a>.</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e714"><span class="noteRef lang en">[22] I am reminded of
                     Cohen-Aponte’s recent discussion about decolonizing the global renaissance,
                     encapsulated by her discussion about terminology. She notes the important
                     ramifications of changing just one word, such as if we were to change the sentence
                     “viceregal art…as art that just so happened to <cite class="title italic">coincide</cite> with colonization” to “art produced <em class="emph">under</em> colonization” [<a href="#cohenaponte2017">2017</a>, 74].</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e768"><span class="noteRef lang en">[23] The LCSH used are not determined by the authors themselves.</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e790"><span class="noteRef lang en">[24] In 2017, the JCBL posted a position for a postdoctoral fellow for
                     data curation in Latin American and Caribbean Indigenous languages. As stated in
                     the job description, “The goal of this project is to assess
                     how digital tools and metadata created through collaborative processes across a
                     hemispheric arc can serve scholarly and non-scholarly communities now and into
                     the future.” See <a href="https://www.clir.org/fellowships/postdoc/applicants/john-carter-brown-library-brown-university/" onclick="window.open('https://www.clir.org/fellowships/postdoc/applicants/john-carter-brown-library-brown-university/'); return false" class="ref">https://www.clir.org/fellowships/postdoc/applicants/john-carter-brown-library-brown-university/</a>.
                     </span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e831"><span class="noteRef lang en">[25] See also
                     Fiormonte 2016 for another discussion about the Global South, the production of
                     knowledge, and DH.</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e884"><span class="noteRef lang en">[26] See Kilroy-Ewbank 2018 for another example of this
                     practice.</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e902"><span class="noteRef lang en">[27] I typically have students watch Smarthistory videos
                     <em class="emph">not</em> related to Spanish colonial art, including <cite class="title italic">Augustus of Primaporta</cite> (<a href="https://youtu.be/3i8iou6tXqY" onclick="window.open('https://youtu.be/3i8iou6tXqY'); return false" class="ref">https://youtu.be/3i8iou6tXqY</a>) or
                     Polykleitos’s <cite class="title italic">Doryphoros</cite> (<a href="https://youtu.be/EAR9RAMg9NY" onclick="window.open('https://youtu.be/EAR9RAMg9NY'); return false" class="ref">https://youtu.be/EAR9RAMg9NY</a>).</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e955"><span class="noteRef lang en">[28] PESSCA is the Project on
                     the Engraved Sources of Spanish Colonial Art (<a href="https://colonialart.org/" onclick="window.open('https://colonialart.org/'); return false" class="ref">https://colonialart.org/</a>). ALAA is the
                     Association of Latin American Art, and its digital resources page is found here:
                     <a href="https://associationlatinamericanart.org/digital-resources/" onclick="window.open('https://associationlatinamericanart.org/digital-resources/'); return false" class="ref">https://associationlatinamericanart.org/digital-resources/</a>.</span></div>
            </div>
            <div id="worksCited">
               <h2>Works Cited</h2>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="afandador2019">
                     <!-- close -->Afandador Llach 2019</span> Afandador Llach, Marí José.
                  2019. “Tecnología al servicio de las Humanidades”. “Telos” 112. Accessed 11 April 2020. <a href="https://telos.fundaciontelefonica.com/telos-112-cuaderno-central-humanidades-en-un-mundo-stem-maria-jose-afanadortecnologia-al-servicio-de-las-humanidades/" onclick="window.open('https://telos.fundaciontelefonica.com/telos-112-cuaderno-central-humanidades-en-un-mundo-stem-maria-jose-afanadortecnologia-al-servicio-de-las-humanidades/'); return false" class="ref">https://telos.fundaciontelefonica.com/telos-112-cuaderno-central-humanidades-en-un-mundo-stem-maria-jose-afanadortecnologia-al-servicio-de-las-humanidades/</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="alioto2017">
                     <!-- close -->Alioto 2017</span> Alioto, Daisy. 2017. “Can Social Tagging Deepen the Museum Experience?”
                  <cite class="title italic">Hyperallergic</cite>. 3 November. Accessed 15 January 2018.
                  <a href="https://hyperallergic.com/409854/can-social-tagging-deepen-the-museum-experience/" onclick="window.open('https://hyperallergic.com/409854/can-social-tagging-deepen-the-museum-experience/'); return false" class="ref">https://hyperallergic.com/409854/can-social-tagging-deepen-the-museum-experience/</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="alpers1979">
                     <!-- close -->Alpers 1979</span> Alpers, Svetlana. 1979. “Style is What You Make It: The Visual Arts Once Again”. In
                  <cite class="title italic">The Concept of Style</cite>, edited by Berel Lang, 95–117.
                  Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="baca2002">
                     <!-- close -->Baca 2002</span> Baca, Murtha. 2002. “A
                  picture is worth a thousand words: Metadata for art objects and their visual
                  surrogates”. In <cite class="title italic">Cataloging the Web: Metadata, AACR,
                     and MARC 21</cite>, edited by Wayne Jones et al., 131–138. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow
                  Press.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="baca2013">
                     <!-- close -->Baca and Helmreich 2013</span> Baca, Murtha, and Anne
                  Helmreich. 2013. “Introduction”. <cite class="title italic">Visual Resources</cite> 29, nos. 1–2 (March–June): 1–4.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="bishop2015">
                     <!-- close -->Bishop 2015</span> Bishop, Claire. 2015. “Against Digital Art History”. Humanities Futures: Franklin Humanities
                  Institute. October 20. <a href="https://humanitiesfutures.org/papers/digital-art-history/" onclick="window.open('https://humanitiesfutures.org/papers/digital-art-history/'); return false" class="ref">https://humanitiesfutures.org/papers/digital-art-history/</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="bleichmar2015">
                     <!-- close -->Bleichmar 2015</span> Bleichmar, Daniela. 2015. “The Imperial Visual Archive: Images, Evidence, and Knowledge in the
                  Early Modern Hispanic World”. <cite class="title italic">Colonial Latin American
                     Review</cite> 24, no. 2: 236–266.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="chai2007">
                     <!-- close -->Chai, Zhang, and Jin 2007</span> Chai, Joyce Y., Chen Zhang,
                  and Rong Jin. 2007. “An empirical investigation of user term
                  feedback in text-based targeted image search”. <cite class="title italic">ACM
                     Transactions on Information Systems</cite> 25, no. 1, 1–25. <a href="https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/1198296.1198299" onclick="window.open('https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/1198296.1198299'); return false" class="ref">Doi:
                     10.1145/1198296.1198299</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="codex2014">
                     <!-- close -->Codex Mendoza 2014</span> Codex Mendoza Team. <cite class="title italic">Digital Códice Mendoza/Digital Codex Mendoza.</cite> 2014. Accessed
                  May 13 2018. <a href="http://codicemendoza.inah.gob.mx/inicio.php?lang=spanish" onclick="window.open('http://codicemendoza.inah.gob.mx/inicio.php?lang=spanish'); return false" class="ref">http://codicemendoza.inah.gob.mx/inicio.php?lang=spanish</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="cohenaponte2017">
                     <!-- close -->Cohen-Aponte 2017</span> Cohen-Aponte, Ananda. 2017.
                  “Decolonizing the Global Renaissance: A View from the
                  Andes”. In <cite class="title italic">The Globalization of Renaissance Art: A
                     Critical Review</cite>, edited by Daniel Savoy, 67–94. Leiden: Brill.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="dean2003">
                     <!-- close -->Dean and Leibsohn 2003</span> Dean, Carolyn, and Dana Leibsohn.
                  2003. “Hybridity and Its Discontents: Considering Visual Culture
                  in Colonial Spanish America”. <cite class="title italic">Colonial Latin American
                     Review</cite> 12, no. 1: 5–35.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="deines2018">
                     <!-- close -->Deines, Gil, Lincoln, and Clifford 2018</span> Deines,
                  Nathaniel, Melissa Gil, Matthew Lincoln, and Marissa Clifford. 2018. “Six Lessons Learned from Our First Crowdsourcing Project in the
                  Digital Humanities”. <cite class="title italic">The Iris: Behind the Scenes at
                     the Getty</cite>. 7 February. Accessed 3 June 2018. <a href="http://blogs.getty.edu/iris/six-lessons-learned-from-our-first-crowdsourcing-project-in-the-digital-humanities/" onclick="window.open('http://blogs.getty.edu/iris/six-lessons-learned-from-our-first-crowdsourcing-project-in-the-digital-humanities/'); return false" class="ref">http://blogs.getty.edu/iris/six-lessons-learned-from-our-first-crowdsourcing-project-in-the-digital-humanities/</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="doulkaridou2015">
                     <!-- close -->Doulkaridou 2015</span> Doulkaridou, Elli. 2015. “Reframing Art History”. <cite class="title italic">International
                     Journal for Digital Art History</cite>, no. 1. 67–83. Doi: <a href="https://doi.org/10.11588/dah.2015.1.21638" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.11588/dah.2015.1.21638'); return false" class="ref">https://doi.org/10.11588/dah.2015.1.21638</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="drucker2013">
                     <!-- close -->Drucker 2013</span> Drucker, Johanna. 2013. “Is There a ‘Digital’ Art History?” <cite class="title italic">Visual Resources</cite>, special issue on Digital Art History, edited by Murtha
                  Baca and Anne Helmreich, 29, nos. 1–2 (Spring): 5–13.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="drucker2015">
                     <!-- close -->Drucker, Helmreich, Lincoln, and Rose 2015</span> Drucker,
                  Johanna, Anne Helmreich, Matthew Lincoln, and Francesca Rose. 2015. “Digital Art History: The American Scene”. <cite class="title italic">Perspective</cite> 2, December 7. Accessed October 18, 2017. <a href="http://perspective.revues.org/6021" onclick="window.open('http://perspective.revues.org/6021'); return false" class="ref">http://perspective.revues.org/6021</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="evens2012">
                     <!-- close -->Evens 2012</span> Evens, Aden. 2012. “Ontology of the Digital.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Digital Humanities Quarterly</cite> 6, no. 2.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="farnel2017">
                     <!-- close -->Farnel et al. 2017</span> Farnel, Sharon, Sheila Laroque, Ian
                  Bigelow, Denise Koufogiannakis, Anne Carr-Wiggin, Debbie Feisst, Kayla Lar-Son. 2017.
                  <cite class="title italic">Decolonizing Description: Changing Metadata in Response to
                     the Truth and Reconciliation Commission</cite>. University of Alberta Libraries.
                  Accessed 4 May 2018. <a href="https://s3.libraries.coop/download.librarytoolshed.ca/Presentations/Decolonizing_Description_Netspeed_2017.pdf" onclick="window.open('https://s3.libraries.coop/download.librarytoolshed.ca/Presentations/Decolonizing_Description_Netspeed_2017.pdf'); return false" class="ref">https://s3.libraries.coop/download.librarytoolshed.ca/Presentations/Decolonizing_Description_Netspeed_2017.pdf</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="fiormonte2016">
                     <!-- close -->Fiormonte 2016</span> Fiormonte, Domenico. 2016. “¿Por qué las Humanidades Digitales necesitan al Sur?”
                  <cite class="title italic">Humanidades Digitales: Construcciones locales en contextos
                     globales</cite>. Asociación Argentina de Humanidades Digitales, Buenos Aires.
                  Accessed 14 April 2020.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="fletcher2015">
                     <!-- close -->Fletcher 2015</span> Fletcher, Pamela. 2015. “Reflections on Digital Art History.” <cite class="title italic">caa.reviews</cite>, June 18. Accessed April 15, 2017. <a href="http://www.caareviews.org/reviews/2726#.X9bL4NhKhPY" onclick="window.open('http://www.caareviews.org/reviews/2726#.X9bL4NhKhPY'); return false" class="ref">Doi:
                     10.3202/caa.reviews/2015/73</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="graban2019">
                     <!-- close -->Graban, Marty, Romano, and Vandergrift 2019</span> Graban,
                  Tarez Samra, Paul Marty, Allen Romano, Micah Vandergrift. 2019. “Introduction: Questioning Collaboration, Labor, and Visibility in Digital
                  Humanities Research.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Digital Humanities Quarterly</cite>. 13, no. 2. Accessed 2
                  February 2020. <a href="https://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/13/2/000416/000416.html" onclick="window.open('https://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/13/2/000416/000416.html'); return false" class="ref">https://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/13/2/000416/000416.html</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="harris2015">
                     <!-- close -->Harris and Zucker 2015</span> Harris, Beth, and Steven
                  Zucker. 2015. “Where is the pedagogy in digital art
                  history?”
                  <cite class="title italic">Smarthistory blog</cite>. Accessed 9 May 2020. <a href="https://smarthistoryblog.org/2015/07/13/where-is-the-pedagogy-in-digital-art-history/" onclick="window.open('https://smarthistoryblog.org/2015/07/13/where-is-the-pedagogy-in-digital-art-history/'); return false" class="ref">https://smarthistoryblog.org/2015/07/13/where-is-the-pedagogy-in-digital-art-history/</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="hohensee2018">
                     <!-- close -->Hohensee 2018</span> Hohensee, Naraelle. 2018. “Connecting with the world.” Smarthistoryblog.org. Accessed 6
                  June. <a href="https://smarthistoryblog.org/2018/06/06/connecting-with-the-world/" onclick="window.open('https://smarthistoryblog.org/2018/06/06/connecting-with-the-world/'); return false" class="ref">https://smarthistoryblog.org/2018/06/06/connecting-with-the-world/</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="honig2018">
                     <!-- close -->Honig 2018</span> Honig, Elizabeth Alice. 2018. “Teaching Renaissance Workshop Practices as Network Analysis.”
                  In <cite class="title italic">Journal of Interactive Technology &amp; Pedagogy</cite>, no.
                  12. <a href="https://jitp.commons.gc.cuny.edu/teaching-renaissance-workshop-practice-as-network-analysis/" onclick="window.open('https://jitp.commons.gc.cuny.edu/teaching-renaissance-workshop-practice-as-network-analysis/'); return false" class="ref">https://jitp.commons.gc.cuny.edu/teaching-renaissance-workshop-practice-as-network-analysis/</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="hoobler2018">
                     <!-- close -->Hoobler et al. 2018</span> Hoobler, Ellen, et al. 2018.
                  “Of Software and Sepulchers: Modeling Ancient Tombs from
                  Oaxaca, Mexico.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Journal of Interactive Technology &amp; Pedagogy</cite>, no.
                  12. <a href="https://jitp.commons.gc.cuny.edu/of-software-and-sepulchers-modeling-ancient-tombs-from-oaxaca-mexico/" onclick="window.open('https://jitp.commons.gc.cuny.edu/of-software-and-sepulchers-modeling-ancient-tombs-from-oaxaca-mexico/'); return false" class="ref">https://jitp.commons.gc.cuny.edu/of-software-and-sepulchers-modeling-ancient-tombs-from-oaxaca-mexico/</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="kalay2008">
                     <!-- close -->Kalay 2008</span> Kalay, Yehuda E. 2008. “Introduction: Preserving cultural heritage through digital media.” In
                  <cite class="title italic">New Heritage: New Media and Cultural Heritage</cite>, edited
                  by Yehuda Kalay, Thomas Kvan, and Janice Affleck. London: Routledge.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="kalayetal2008">
                     <!-- close -->Kalay, Kvan, and Affleck 2008</span> Kalay, Yehuda, Thomas
                  Kvan, and Janice Affleck, eds. 2008. <cite class="title italic">New Heritage: New Media and
                     Cultural Heritage</cite>. London: Routledge.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="keralis2016">
                     <!-- close -->Keralis 2016</span> Keralis, Stephen. 2016. “Labor.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Digital Pedagogy in the Humanities: Concepts, Models, and
                     Experiments</cite>. MLA Commons, 2016. Accessed 7 April 2020. <a href="https://digitalpedagogy.mla.hcommons.org/keywords/labor/" onclick="window.open('https://digitalpedagogy.mla.hcommons.org/keywords/labor/'); return false" class="ref">https://digitalpedagogy.mla.hcommons.org/keywords/labor/</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="kilroy2017a">
                     <!-- close -->Kilroy-Ewbank 2017a</span> Kilroy-Ewbank, Lauren G. 2017a.
                  “What is Public Art History?” Smarthistory.org blog. 7
                  August 2017. Accessed 3 June 2018. <a href="https://smarthistoryblog.org/2017/08/07/what-is-public-art-history/" onclick="window.open('https://smarthistoryblog.org/2017/08/07/what-is-public-art-history/'); return false" class="ref">https://smarthistoryblog.org/2017/08/07/what-is-public-art-history/</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="kilroy2017b">
                     <!-- close -->Kilroy-Ewbank 2017b</span> Kilroy-Ewbank, Lauren G. 2017b.
                  “How do we create a field of Public Art History?”
                  Smarthistory.org bolg. 8 August 2017. Accessed 3 June 2018. <a href="https://smarthistoryblog.org/2017/08/08/how-do-we-create-a-field-of-public-art-history/" onclick="window.open('https://smarthistoryblog.org/2017/08/08/how-do-we-create-a-field-of-public-art-history/'); return false" class="ref">https://smarthistoryblog.org/2017/08/08/how-do-we-create-a-field-of-public-art-history/</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="kilroy2018">
                     <!-- close -->Kilroy-Ewbank 2018</span> Kilroy-Ewbank, Lauren G. 2018.
                  “Doing Digital Art history in a Pre-Columbian Art Survey
                  Class: Creating an Omeka Exhibition Around the Mixtec Codex
                  Zouche-Nuttall.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Journal of Interactive Technology &amp; Pedagogy</cite>, no.
                  12. <a href="https://jitp.commons.gc.cuny.edu/doing-digital-art-history-in-a-pre-columbian-art-survey-class-creating-an-omeka-exhibition-around-the-mixtec-codex-zouche-nuttall/" onclick="window.open('https://jitp.commons.gc.cuny.edu/doing-digital-art-history-in-a-pre-columbian-art-survey-class-creating-an-omeka-exhibition-around-the-mixtec-codex-zouche-nuttall/'); return false" class="ref">https://jitp.commons.gc.cuny.edu/doing-digital-art-history-in-a-pre-columbian-art-survey-class-creating-an-omeka-exhibition-around-the-mixtec-codex-zouche-nuttall/</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="leibsohn2015">
                     <!-- close -->Leibsohn and Mundy 2015</span> Leibsohn, Dana, and Barbara
                  E. Mundy. 2015. <cite class="title italic">Vistas: Visual Culture in Spanish America,
                     1520–1820.</cite> Accessed 15 April 2018. <a href="http://fordham.edu/vistas" onclick="window.open('http://fordham.edu/vistas'); return false" class="ref">http://fordham.edu/vistas</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="lincoln2014">
                     <!-- close -->Lincoln 2014</span> Lincoln, Matthew D. 2014. “The Meta/Data of Art History.” <cite class="title italic">Matthew
                     Lincoln, PhD </cite>(blog). Original date 28 Jul 2014. Accessed 13 April 2018.
                  <a href="https://matthewlincoln.net/2014/07/28/the-meta-slash-data-of-art-history.html" onclick="window.open('https://matthewlincoln.net/2014/07/28/the-meta-slash-data-of-art-history.html'); return false" class="ref">https://matthewlincoln.net/2014/07/28/the-meta-slash-data-of-art-history.html</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="mavcor2018">
                     <!-- close -->MAVCOR 2018</span> MAVCOR. 2018. “Ocongate Altar.” Center for the Study of Material and Visual Cultures of
                  Religion. Accessed 2 June 2018. <a href="https://mavcor.yale.edu/material-objects/giga-project/ocongate-altar-360" onclick="window.open('https://mavcor.yale.edu/material-objects/giga-project/ocongate-altar-360'); return false" class="ref">https://mavcor.yale.edu/material-objects/giga-project/ocongate-altar-360</a>
                  
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="maravall1986">
                     <!-- close -->Maravall 1986</span> Maravall, José Antonio. 1986. <cite class="title italic">Culture of the Baroque: Analysis of a Historical Structure.</cite>
                  Manchester: Manchester University Press.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="metropolitan2018">
                     <!-- close -->Metropolitan Museum of Art</span> Metropolitan Museum
                  of Art. 2000–2018. <cite class="title italic">The Heilbrunn Timeline.</cite> Accessed 6
                  June 2018. <a href="https://www.metmuseum.org/toah/" onclick="window.open('https://www.metmuseum.org/toah/'); return false" class="ref">https://www.metmuseum.org/toah/</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="mundy2017">
                     <!-- close -->Mundy and Leibsohn 2017</span> Mundy, Barbara E., and Dana
                  Leibsohn. 2017. “Digital Resources: The State of Digital Research
                  on the Visual Culture of Spanish America.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Latin American History</cite>.
                  <a href="http://latinamericanhistory.oxfordre.com/view/10.1093/acrefore/9780199366439.001.0001/acrefore-9780199366439-e-117" onclick="window.open('http://latinamericanhistory.oxfordre.com/view/10.1093/acrefore/9780199366439.001.0001/acrefore-9780199366439-e-117'); return false" class="ref">DOI: 10.1093/acrefore/9780199366439.013.117</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="menard2009">
                     <!-- close -->Ménard 2009</span> Ménard, Elaine. 2009. “Images: Indexing for accessibility in a multi-lingual environment — challenges
                  and perspectives.”
                  <cite class="title italic">The Indexer</cite> 27, no. 2, 70–76. 
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="nilsson2004">
                     <!-- close -->Nilsson, Naeve, and Palmér 2004</span> Nilsson, Mikael,
                  Ambjörn Naeve, and Matthias Palmér. 2004. “The Edutella P2P
                  network: Supporting democratic e-learning and communities of practice.” In
                  <cite class="title italic">Online Education Using Learning Objects</cite>, edited by
                  Rory McGreal, 244–X. New York: RoutledgeFalmer.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="omeka2018a">
                     <!-- close -->Omeka Team 2018a</span> Omeka Team. 2018a. Omeka.net.
                  Corporation for Digital Scholarship. Accessed 12 June. <a href="http://www.omeka.net" onclick="window.open('http://www.omeka.net'); return false" class="ref">www.omeka.net</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="omeka2018b">
                     <!-- close -->Omeka Team 2018b</span> Omeka Team. 2018b. “Working with Dublin Core.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Omeka Classic User Manual</cite>. Accessed March 29. <a href="https://omeka.org/classic/docs/Content/Working_with_Dublin_Core/" onclick="window.open('https://omeka.org/classic/docs/Content/Working_with_Dublin_Core/'); return false" class="ref">https://omeka.org/classic/docs/Content/Working_with_Dublin_Core/</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="pessca">
                     <!-- close -->PESSCA</span> 
                  <cite class="title italic">Project for the Engraved Sources of Spanish Colonial Art
                     (PESSCA)</cite>. 2005–2018. Accessed 4 April 2018. <a href="http://colonialart.org" onclick="window.open('http://colonialart.org'); return false" class="ref">http://colonialart.org</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="peters2009">
                     <!-- close -->Peters 2009</span> Peters, Isabella. 2009. <cite class="title italic">Folksonomies: Indexing and Retrieval in Web 2.0</cite>, translated
                  by Paul Becker. Berlin: DeGruyter.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="peterson2008">
                     <!-- close -->Peterson 2008</span> Peterson, Jeanette F. 2008. “Renaissance: A Kaleidoscopic View from the Spanish Americas.”
                  In <cite class="title italic">Renaissance Theory</cite>, edited by James Elkins and Robert
                  Williams, 321–332. London: Routledge.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="preziosi1991">
                     <!-- close -->Preziosi 1991</span> Preziosi, Donald. 1991. <cite class="title italic">Rethinking Art History: Meditations on a Coy Science</cite>. New
                  Haven: Yale University Press.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="richardson2020">
                     <!-- close -->Richardson 2020</span> Richardson, Erica. 2020. “The Trouble with Tags: The Challenges of Collaborative Metadata and
                  Participatory Culture in Class Blogs.”
                  <cite class="title italic">The Journal of Interactive Technology and Pedgagogy</cite>.
                  Accessed 9 May 2020. <a href="https://jitp.commons.gc.cuny.edu/category/teaching-fails/" onclick="window.open('https://jitp.commons.gc.cuny.edu/category/teaching-fails/'); return false" class="ref">https://jitp.commons.gc.cuny.edu/category/teaching-fails/</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="risam2018">
                     <!-- close -->Risam 2018</span> Risam, Roopika. 2018. “Decolonizing Digital Humanities in Theory and Practice.” In <cite class="title italic">The Routledge Companion to Media Studies and Digital
                     Humanities</cite>, edited by Jentery Sayers, 78–86. New York: Routledge.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="rodriguez2018">
                     <!-- close -->Rodriguez, Ferrer, Choe, and Anderson 2018</span> Rodriguez, Linda, Ada Ferrer, Kris Minhae Choe, and Eric Anderson. 2018. <cite class="title italic">Digital Aponte</cite>. Accessed 13 April 2018. <a href="http://aponte.hosting.nyu.edu/" onclick="window.open('http://aponte.hosting.nyu.edu/'); return false" class="ref">http://aponte.hosting.nyu.edu/</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="rodriguez2009">
                     <!-- close -->Rodríguez-Ortega 2009-2010</span> Rodríguez-Ortega, Nuria.
                  2009–2010. “La cultura histórico-artística y la Historia del Arte
                  en la sociedad digital. Una reflexión crítica sobre los modos de hacer Historia
                  del Arte en un nuevo context.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Museo y Territorio</cite>, no. 2–3: 9–26.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="rodriguez2013a">
                     <!-- close -->Rodríguez-Ortega 2013a</span> Rodríguez-Ortega, Nuria.
                  2013. “Digital Art History: An Examination of Conscience.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Visual Resources</cite> 29, no. 1–2: 129–133.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="rodriguez2013b">
                     <!-- close -->Rodríguez-Ortega 2013b</span> Rodríguez-Ortega, Nuria.
                  2013. “Getty Voices: It’s Time to Rethink and Expand Art History
                  for the Digital Age.”
                  <cite class="title italic">The Iris: Behind the Scenes at the Getty</cite>. 5 March.
                  Accessed 13 May 2018. <a href="http://blogs.getty.edu/iris/its-time-to-rethink-and-expand-art-history-for-the-digital-age/" onclick="window.open('http://blogs.getty.edu/iris/its-time-to-rethink-and-expand-art-history-for-the-digital-age/'); return false" class="ref">http://blogs.getty.edu/iris/its-time-to-rethink-and-expand-art-history-for-the-digital-age/</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="rodriguezortega2018">
                     <!-- close -->Rodríguez-Ortega 2018</span> Rodríguez-Ortega,
                  Nuria. 2018. “Desarrollos digitales de la Historia del Arte:
                  implicaciones epistémicas, críticas y metodológicas.” In <cite class="title italic">Humanidades digitales: edición literature y arte</cite>, edited by
                  Isabel Galina Russel et al., digital edition, loc. 1774–2783. Mexico City: Bonilla
                  Artigas Editores.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="rodriguez2019">
                     <!-- close -->Rodríguez-Ortega 2019</span> Rodríguez-Ortega, Nuria.
                  2019. “Digital Art History: The Questions that Need to Be
                  Asked.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Visual Resources</cite>, 35, no. 1-2, 6-20, DOI: <a href="https://doi-org.lib.pepperdine.edu/10.1080/01973762.2019.1553832" onclick="window.open('https://doi-org.lib.pepperdine.edu/10.1080/01973762.2019.1553832'); return false" class="ref">10.1080/01973762.2019.1553832</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="schilling2014">
                     <!-- close -->Schilling 2014</span> Schilling, Peter. 2014. “Technology as Epistemology.”
                  <cite class="title italic">The Academic Commons</cite>. Accessed 4 May. <a href="http://www.academiccommons.org/2014/09/09/technology-as-epistemology/" onclick="window.open('http://www.academiccommons.org/2014/09/09/technology-as-epistemology/'); return false" class="ref">http://www.academiccommons.org/2014/09/09/technology-as-epistemology/</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="smarthistory2018">
                     <!-- close -->Smarthistory 2018</span> Smarthistory. 2018. <cite class="title italic">Smarthistory.org</cite>. Edited by Beth Harris and Steven Zucker.
                  Accessed 6 June. <a href="https://smarthistory.org/" onclick="window.open('https://smarthistory.org/'); return false" class="ref">https://smarthistory.org/</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="sullivan1996">
                     <!-- close -->Sullivan 1996</span> Sullivan, Edward. 1996. “European Painting and the Art of the New World Colonies.” In
                  <cite class="title italic">Converging Cultures: Art and Identity in Spanish
                     America</cite>, exh. cat.,28-41. New York: Brooklyn Museum.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="turin2015">
                     <!-- close -->Turin 2015</span> Turin, Mark. 2015. “Devil in the Digital: Ambivalent Results in an Object-Based Teaching
                  Course.”
                  <cite class="title italic">Museum Anthropology</cite> 38, no. 2: 123–132.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="zorich2012">
                     <!-- close -->Zorich 2012</span> Zorich, Diane M. 2012. “Transitioning to a Digital World: Art History, Its Research Centers,
                  and Digital Scholarship.” A Report to The Samuel H. Kress Foundation and
                  The Roy Rosenzweig Center for History and New Media, George Mason University.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="zucker2018">
                     <!-- close -->Zucker 2018</span> Zucker, Steven. 2018. <cite class="title italic">Profzucker Flickr Account.</cite> Accessed January 3. <a href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/profzucker/" onclick="window.open('https://www.flickr.com/photos/profzucker/'); return false" class="ref">https://www.flickr.com/photos/profzucker/</a>.
               </div>
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar"><a href="#">Preview</a>  |  <span style="color: grey">XML</span> |  <a href="#" onclick="javascript:window.print();" title="Click for print friendly version">Print Article</a></div>
         </div>
      </div>
   </body>
</html>