<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
      <title>[PREVIEW] DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly: </title>
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_screen.css" media="screen" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_print.css" media="print" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" /><style type="text/css">
        #mainContent {
          float: none;
          padding-top: 2em;
          padding-left: 4em;
          padding-right: 4em;
          margin-left: 225px;
           
        }</style></head>
   <body>
      <div id="mainContent">
         <div xmlns:dhqBiblio="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/ns/biblio" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" class="DHQarticle">
            <div id="pubInfo">Preview<br />Volume  Number 
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar">
               <form id="taporware" action="get">
                  <div><a href="//preview/index.html">Preview</a>
                      | 
                     <a rel="external" href="//vol///000418.xml">XML</a>
                     
                     | 
                     		   Discuss
                     			(<a href="/dhq/vol///000418/000418.html#disqus_thread" data-disqus-identifier="000418">
                        				Comments
                        			</a>)
                     
                  </div>
               </form>
            </div>
            
            <div class="DHQheader">
               
               
               
               
               <h1 class="articleTitle lang en">Manifesto: A Life on the Hyphen: Balancing
                  Identities as Librarians, Scholars, and Digital Practitioners
               </h1>
               
               
               <div class="author"><span style="color: grey">Hélène Huet</span> &lt;<a href="mailto:hhuet_at_ufl_dot_edu" onclick="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('hhuet_at_ufl_dot_edu'); return false;" onkeypress="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('hhuet_at_ufl_dot_edu'); return false;">hhuet_at_ufl_dot_edu</a>&gt;, University of Florida
               </div>
               
               <div class="author"><span style="color: grey">Suzan Alteri</span> &lt;<a href="mailto:salteri_at_ufl_dot_edu" onclick="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('salteri_at_ufl_dot_edu'); return false;" onkeypress="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('salteri_at_ufl_dot_edu'); return false;">salteri_at_ufl_dot_edu</a>&gt;, University of Florida
               </div>
               
               <div class="author"><span style="color: grey">Laurie N. Taylor</span> &lt;<a href="mailto:laurien_at_ufl_dot_edu" onclick="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('laurien_at_ufl_dot_edu'); return false;" onkeypress="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('laurien_at_ufl_dot_edu'); return false;">laurien_at_ufl_dot_edu</a>&gt;, University of Florida
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               <span class="Z3988" title="url_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;rft_val_fmt=info%3Aofi%2Ffmt%3Akev%3Amtx%3Ajournal&amp;rfr_id=info%3Asid%2Fzotero.org%3A2&amp;rft.genre=article&amp;rft.atitle=Manifesto%3A%20A%20Life%20on%20the%20Hyphen%3A%20Balancing%20Identities%20as%20Librarians,%20Scholars,%20and%20Digital%20Practitioners&amp;rft.jtitle=Digital%20Humanities%20Quarterly&amp;rft.stitle=DHQ&amp;rft.issn=1938-4122&amp;rft.date=&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.aulast=Huet&amp;rft.aufirst=Hélène&amp;rft.au=Hélène%20Huet&amp;rft.au=Suzan%20Alteri&amp;rft.au=Laurie N.%20Taylor"> </span></div>
            
            
            <div id="DHQtext">
               
               
               <div id="abstract">
                  <h2>Abstract</h2>
                  
                  
                  <p>The work of digital humanists and librarians is often invisible to the larger
                     communities in which they work, particularly in academia. This opinion essay by
                     three librarian-scholar-digital practitioners explores invisible work and life
                     on the hyphen — between the academy and the library and between the human and
                     the digital. In this essay, we illustrate how librarian-scholar-digital
                     practitioners can feel overworked and underappreciated, working in and with
                     multiple fields and communities who have different and sometimes competing
                     methodologies. Through two examples, we look at how living on the hyphen takes
                     its toll for librarian-scholar-digital practitioners. We end our essay by
                     detailing steps faculty and administration can take to help us solve the problem
                     and realize the promise of digital humanities.
                  </p>
                  
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
               <div class="counter"><a href="#p1">1</a></div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p1"> We are full-time librarians, fully-fledged scholars and digital humanists. As such,
                  we split our work between different yet often intersecting areas. We answer to the
                  distinct professional worlds of the academy and the library, the human and the
                  digital. Or, to borrow the phrase of scholar Gustavo Pérez Firmat, we live on the
                  hyphen. As hyphenated scholars, much of our work is invisible to either (or both)
                  professional worlds. 
               </div>
               
               
               <div class="counter"><a href="#p2">2</a></div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p2">Our situation is not unique. Many digital humanists constantly experience the
                  difficulties of having to perform interdisciplinary work. As Bethany Nowviskie
                  explains: “In a field whose native interdisciplinarity verges on
                  inter-professionalism, full-time, long-term digital humanities staff already
                  struggle against the pressure to become jacks of all trades and masters of
                  none.”
                  [<a class="ref" href="#nowviskie2016">Nowviskie 2016</a>] Similarly, in 2012, Matthew Kirschenbaum argued the
                  term digital humanities as <em class="term">tactical</em> because “digital humanities emerges as a rare vector for jujitsu, simultaneously serving
                  to position the humanities at the very forefront of certain value-laden agendas
                  [...] while at the same time allowing for various forms of intra-institutional
                  mobility as new courses are approved, new colleagues are hired, new resources
                  are allotted, and old resources are reallocated.”
                  [<a class="ref" href="#kirschenbaum2012">Kirschenbaum 2012</a>, 415–16] As Roopika Risam notes more recently:
                  “This is the promise of digital humanities: critical,
                  generous digital scholarship that has the potential to cross institutional
                  sectors; to overcome the divides between archive, library, university, and
                  museum; and create networked publics.”
                  [<a class="ref" href="#risam2019">Risam 2019</a>, 142] Our question is <em class="emph">how to realize this
                     promise.</em></div>
               
               
               <div class="counter"><a href="#p3">3</a></div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p3"> In 2017, the Digital Library Federation launched a working group on labor in digital
                  libraries, and in 2018 they released their research agenda in which they discuss
                  research on digital library labor conditions and suggest projects for further
                  research. Also in 2018, Christina Boyles, Anne Cong-Huyen, Carrie Johnston, Jim
                  McGrath, and Amanda Phillips issued a call to “make forms of
                  digital labor and the agents behind this labor more visible ”[<a class="ref" href="#boyles2018">Boyles 2018</a>, 693] in their article “Precarious Labor and the Digital Humanities.” We are answering that call
                  by investigating the working conditions of those who live on the hyphen and work as
                  invisible agents of digital labor. As this special issue of <cite class="title italic">Digital Humanities Quarterly</cite> is also a call for action, we see an
                  opportunity to discuss our experiences and hope they will lead to more recognition
                  from our various communities, as well as spark ideas for improvement and inclusion
                  in other DH communities. 
               </div>
               
               
               <div class="counter"><a href="#p4">4</a></div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p4"> We enjoy our hyphenated lives, and our ability to build bridges between and
                  contribute to fields we love. But we also are tired, overworked and
                  underappreciated, in large part because our split professional identities often fit
                  us nowhere, marking a particular kind of intersection that warrants recognition. 
               </div>
               
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">At the Intersection of Overtaxed and Underevaluated</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p5">5</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p5">Like many practitioners of digital humanities, we frequently find our services
                     and insights in high demand because of our combination of skills. We give guest
                     lectures via Skype and speak at other institutions, not just on our scholarly
                     output but also on librarianship, digital practice, and teaching. We provide
                     support ranging from consultation to project management on large-scale digital
                     humanities projects, and we advise colleagues on smaller digital projects, often
                     serving as both project managers and technicians. We also create our own digital
                     humanities projects based on our research and professional responsibilities.
                  </div>
                  
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p6">6</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p6">And yet, despite demands for these services and insights and consultations, we
                     are aware that many faculty do not position us as scholarly equals, and that we
                     are underserved by the outdated criteria used to evaluate our performance. Our
                     supervisors applaud our scholarship yet nonetheless struggle to view research as
                     a billable aspect of our roles and responsibilities, rather than an
                     extracurricular activity done outside of working hours. And they struggle to
                     justify our extracurricular activities according to the guidelines they use to
                     determine tenure and promotion. This makes the invisibility of our work as
                     consultants, technicians, and digital scholars more apparent.
                  </div>
                  
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p7">7</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p7">When we do receive credit for our digital research activities, faculty and
                     administrators may fail to understand that our work is necessarily separated
                     between subject-specific research and library research and must therefore be
                     weighted differently. At other times our involvement is neither explicitly
                     librarianship nor explicitly digital humanities scholarship, but still fulfills
                     essential work in the spaces between, causing some of our colleagues to consider
                     us second-class researchers because our work does not fit clearly within one
                     silo or discipline. Suzan Alteri, University of Florida’s Curator of the Baldwin
                     Library of Historical Literature, encountered this problem after receiving grant
                     funding to produce an online annotated bibliography. This digital research
                     project combined Alteri’s expertise in rare books, book history, and children’s
                     literature. While the bibliographic aspect of the project fell under her
                     professional responsibilities, the research required to compile the bibliography
                     and contextualize texts was largely ignored. Having to combine subject research
                     with librarianship makes being a librarian and a digital scholar a real
                     struggle. The invisibility of non-discrete research intensifies the difference
                     from invisible labor to expected presentation, making it acute.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Splitting Professional Identities</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p8">8</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p8">Living on the hyphen, we are constantly juggling positionings and identities.
                     When someone asks us what our research is about, we struggle to answer. Do we
                     detail all of the work we do: our research in library science, our area
                     specialty, and digital humanities? Or do we only detail research that will be
                     most relevant to the person with whom we are speaking?
                  </div>
                  
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p9">9</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p9">Dr. Hélène Huet, the University of Florida's European Studies Librarian, is a
                     digital humanist and a specialist in both book history and the French literary
                     movement known as Decadence. Thus, Huet is both a digital practitioner and a
                     digital humanities expert for the community in which she works. On a given day,
                     depending on whether she is talking to librarians, digital humanists, or French
                     and Francophone Studies scholars, she discusses a different area of her current
                     research. Her example highlights one of the issues we are facing. Indeed, while
                     we love our multi-faceted professional identities, we sometimes think we are
                     losing our identity, and that by participating across so many different fields,
                     we are alien to all of them.
                  </div>
                  
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p10">10</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p10">Living on the hyphen takes its toll, as we spread our inadequate research time
                     too thin or fail to adequately demonstrate the multi-faceted nature of our work
                     as scholars and professionals.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Realizing the Promise</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p11">11</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p11">Faculty and administration can take several positive steps toward realizing
                     Risam’s promise and helping us solve the problem.
                  </div>
                  
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p12">12</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p12">First, we must all take responsibility for making all aspects of our work visible
                     to others. Therefore, at your next conference presentation, please talk about
                     how you completed your digital humanities project, what tools you used, what
                     decisions you made, who your collaborators were, and how your community and
                     working conditions made it possible. Encourage other presenters to focus on the
                     methodological aspects of the collaboration, as well as the results. Open up
                     calls for papers to include not just scholarly and theoretical concerns, but
                     practical concerns as well. Encourage practitioners and scholars to see each
                     other as equals. This is a call for all of us to be generous, generative, and
                     inclusive.
                  </div>
                  
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p13">13</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p13">Second, departments and programs need to revise their tenure and promotion
                     standards to ensure that hyphenated scholars — individuals who increasingly
                     represent the norm within academia — are recognized for their work. This
                     requires reflecting on the origins of the term hyphenated, and is indicative of
                     a change to better support our colleagues of color and colleagues from different
                     cultural backgrounds who face additional demands from hyphenated identities and
                     systematic oppression.
                  </div>
                  
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p14">14</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p14">Finally, we all need to push for a cultural change that includes all people
                     involved in academic work thus making visible the invisible work of those on the
                     hyphen, including but not limited to librarians-scholars-digital practitioners.
                     Achieving this cultural change within and alongside other communities pushing
                     for recognition of labor conditions and labor communities only makes sense.
                     Alone, our work is rendered invisible, but working collectively towards changing
                     the daily practices of academia can make the full scope, impact, and import of
                     our work visible. In doing so, we might make visible understandings of work that
                     are appreciative, compassionate, and connected.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
               
            </div>
            
            <div id="worksCited">
               <h2>Works Cited</h2>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="boyles2018">
                     <!-- close -->Boyles 2018</span>  Boyles, C.; Cong-Huyen, A.; Johnston,
                  C.; McGrath, J. and Phillips. A. “Precarious Labor and the
                  Digital Humanities.”
                  <cite class="title italic">American Quarterly </cite>70.3 (2018): 693-700.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="kirschenbaum2012">
                     <!-- close -->Kirschenbaum 2012</span> Kirschenbaum, M. “Digital Humanities As/Is a Tactical Term.” In M. K.
                  Gold (ed), <cite class="title italic">Debates in the Digital Humanities.
                     </cite>University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis (2012), pp. 415-28.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="nowviskie2016">
                     <!-- close -->Nowviskie 2016</span> Nowviskie, B. “Resistance in the Materials.” In M. K. Gold and L. F.
                  Klein (eds), <cite class="title italic">Debates in the Digital Humanities.</cite>
                  University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis (2016).
                  http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/debates/text/66
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="perezfirmat1994">
                     <!-- close -->Pérez Firmat 1994</span> Pérez Firmat, G. “Life on the Hyphen: The Cuban-American Way” In <cite class="title italic">Bulletin for Biblical Research </cite>University of Texas
                  Press, Austin, TX (1994).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="risam2019">
                     <!-- close -->Risam 2019</span> Risam, R. <cite class="title italic">New
                     Digital Worlds: Postcolonial Digital Humanities in Theory, Praxis, and
                     Pedagogy.</cite> Northeastern University Press, Evanston, IL (2019). 
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="workinggrouponlaborindigitallibraries2018">
                     <!-- close -->Working Group on Labor in Digital Libraries 2018</span> “Research Agenda: Valuing Labor in Digital Libraries.” Working Group
                  on Labor in Digital Libraries. Digital Library Federation. (2018).
                  https://wiki.diglib.org/images/d/d0/DLF_ValuingLabor_ResearchAgenda_2018.pdf
                  
               </div>
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar"><a href="#">Preview</a>  |  <span style="color: grey">XML</span> |  <a href="#" onclick="javascript:window.print();" title="Click for print friendly version">Print Article</a></div>
         </div>
      </div>
   </body>
</html>