<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
      <title>[PREVIEW] DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly: </title>
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_screen.css" media="screen" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_print.css" media="print" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" /><style type="text/css">
        #mainContent {
          float: none;
          padding-top: 2em;
          padding-left: 4em;
          padding-right: 4em;
          margin-left: 225px;
           
        }</style></head>
   <body>
      <div id="mainContent">
         <div class="DHQarticle">
            <div id="pubInfo">Preview<br />Volume 014 Number 3
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar">
               <form id="taporware" action="get">
                  <div><a href="//preview/index.html">Preview</a>
                      | 
                     <a rel="external" href="//vol/14/3/000485.xml">XML</a>
                     
                     | 
                     		   Discuss
                     			(<a href="/dhq/vol/14/3/000485/000485.html#disqus_thread" data-disqus-identifier="000485">
                        				Comments
                        			</a>)
                     
                  </div>
               </form>
            </div>
            
            <div class="DHQheader">
               
               
               
               
               <h1 class="articleTitle lang en">Lab and Slack. Situated Research Practices in
                  Digital Humanities - Introduction to the DHQ Special Issue.
               </h1>
               
               
               <div class="author"><span style="color: grey">Mila Oiva</span> &lt;<a href="mailto:milaoiv_at_utu_dot_fi" onclick="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('milaoiv_at_utu_dot_fi'); return false;" onkeypress="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('milaoiv_at_utu_dot_fi'); return false;">milaoiv_at_utu_dot_fi</a>&gt;, University of Turku (Finland)
               </div>
               
               <div class="author"><span style="color: grey">Urszula
                     Pawlicka-Deger</span> &lt;<a href="mailto:pawlickadeger_at_gmail_dot_com" onclick="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('pawlickadeger_at_gmail_dot_com'); return false;" onkeypress="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('pawlickadeger_at_gmail_dot_com'); return false;">pawlickadeger_at_gmail_dot_com</a>&gt;, Aalto University
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               <span class="Z3988" title="url_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;rft_val_fmt=info%3Aofi%2Ffmt%3Akev%3Amtx%3Ajournal&amp;rfr_id=info%3Asid%2Fzotero.org%3A2&amp;rft.genre=article&amp;rft.atitle=Lab%20and%20Slack.%20Situated%20Research%20Practices%20in%20Digital%20Humanities%20-%20Introduction%20to%20the%20DHQ%20Special%20Issue.&amp;rft.jtitle=Digital%20Humanities%20Quarterly&amp;rft.stitle=DHQ&amp;rft.issn=1938-4122&amp;rft.date=&amp;rft.volume=014&amp;rft.issue=3&amp;rft.aulast=Oiva&amp;rft.aufirst=Mila&amp;rft.au=Mila%20Oiva&amp;rft.au=Urszula%20Pawlicka-Deger"> </span></div>
            
            
            <div id="DHQtext">
               
               
               <div id="abstract">
                  <h2>Abstract</h2>
                  
                  
                  <p>Although the concept of <em class="emph">digital</em> comes with an assumption of
                     placelessness and detachment from physical space and geographical location,
                     these matters still play a significant role in the way the digital humanities
                     research is practiced today, and also in the future. The location, the
                     surroundings and infrastructure open the questions of accessibility and
                     equality: space shapes the opportunities for doing digital humanities research,
                     both enables and hinders collaboration, and both unifies and divides
                     scholars.
                  </p>
                  
                  <p>The purpose of this special issue is to examine the different aspects of <span class="hi bold">situated research practices</span> of the digital humanities
                     covering two perspectives: <span class="hi bold">physical and virtual</span>. The
                     physical places of research refer to the various digital humanities sites
                     (laboratories, centers, departments) all over the world and more widely to the
                     surroundings a location in a particular city, country, cultural sphere or
                     continent affecting research practices. As virtual environments of digital
                     humanities scholarship, we define the digital internet-based platforms,
                     services, and tools that enable research and scholarly collaboration. The
                     aspects that determine digital humanities research in both physical and virtual
                     places are infrastructure (material and non-material), social interaction
                     (communication and collaboration), and context (social, cultural, and political
                     situatedness). The aspects influence each other and changes in one of them can
                     affect the others. They have also impact on what is studied, the ways research
                     can be done, and, in the end the results of our knowledge, what kind of
                     knowledge digital humanities research can provide.
                  </p>
                  
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Digital Humanities Places and Spaces</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p1">1</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p1">Although working in the same university and being interested in similar issues,
                     we, the editors of this special issue, had never met until recently. As it often
                     goes, sitting in different buildings belonging to different departments at the
                     Otaniemi campus of the Aalto University, we were separated by the physical space
                     and organizational structures of the university. Only the lucky coincidence that
                     one of us had a short presentation at the “Aalto HELDIG DH
                     pizza” event, and the other came to listen to that talk took us to
                     the same room to talk to each other. Meeting on the same physical premises
                     enabled us to see how close our interests and thoughts were, not only regarding
                     pizza, but also in scholarly terms.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p2">2</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p2">Our story is not unique. Exploring the digital humanities (DH) matters, one
                     cannot avoid noticing how the establishment of various DH places and their
                     organizational changes influences how, where, and with whom we do DH research.
                     Place plays a role in all academic disciplines, affecting the way we construct
                     knowledge. In the DH field, which comes with a promise of utilization of
                     “nonmaterial” and ubiquitous digital resources, there is
                     a threat that we will forget how the place is also entangled in the digital. DH
                     scholars work together in a physical place — a center and a laboratory — in
                     which an infrastructure, facilities, and equipment determine the knowledge
                     creation practices. DH researchers also collaborate in virtual space — online
                     platforms and virtual research environments — in which an infrastructure,
                     connection, and operation affect the work and research communication. The
                     algorithms and designs of digital analysis and collaboration tools direct the
                     way we work and what kinds of practices are not doable. Further, DH scholars
                     also practice and collaborate in temporary places like hackathons and summer
                     schools established around particular topics and people. Temporariness is one
                     aspect that forms knowledge creation practices. In addition, the prerequisites
                     for doing DH research vary greatly based on the wider social and cultural
                     surroundings.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p3">3</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p3">Examination of the research practices and structures in their cultural contexts
                     and the temporal dimensions guiding the DH from the perspective of situatedness
                     is a relevant topic with great intellectual importance. It reveals the
                     fundamental prerequisites and unnamed assumptions directing and influencing the
                     research and, through that, the research findings. Although the concept of
                     digital comes with an assumption of placelessness and detachment from geography
                     or physical spaces, these matters still play a significant role in the way DH
                     research is practiced today and in the future. Geography, location, and
                     organizational structures open the questions of accessibility and equality:
                     spatiality shapes the opportunities for doing DH research, and both divides and
                     unifies scholars. Organizational and algorithmic structures are political
                     because they construct the prerequisites of research by pushing toward one kind
                     of collaboration and make other kinds of DH work difficult to pursue. The
                     approach of looking at DH from spatial angles provides interesting views of the
                     field’s present-day situation and where it is potentially going in the future.
                     Therefore, it is particularly important to look at DH as a field entangled with
                     the concepts of <em class="emph">place</em> and <em class="emph">space</em> that entail issues of
                     the workplace, social interactions, and research communication.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p4">4</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p4">Notions of <em class="emph">place</em> and <em class="emph">space</em> have popped up across
                     various academic fields and been investigated in different contexts from
                     socially constructed physical places to virtual spaces involving geospatial
                     technologies, platforms, and services. Significantly, the development of spatial
                     technologies and digital research, which would seem to detach work from a
                     physical location, has led to the growing interest in the concepts of
                     <em class="emph">place</em> and <em class="emph">space</em> that are key elements in defining
                     the research culture. Based on essential studies on place and space by Relph
                     [<a href="#relph1976">1976</a>], Lefebvre [<a href="#lefebvre1991">1991</a>], Soja [<a href="#soja1996">1996</a>], and Harrison and
                     Dourish [<a href="#harrison1996">1996</a>], we identify place as a
                     physical location that involves structure, materiality, connectedness,
                     interaction, cultural representation, and social behavior. In contrast to place
                     as the reality, space is seen as the physical and social landscape that emerges
                     through processes operating over varying spatial and temporal scales [<a class="ref" href="#saar2009">Saar and Palang 2009</a>]. Space is thus considered in nonphysical categories
                     including cyberspace, digital infrastructure, geographical space, digital
                     platforms and software. Therefore, space, as Harrison and Dourish aptly
                     summarized, is the opportunity to build a place framed as the understood
                     reality.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p5">5</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p5">The juxtaposition of these two concepts is a starting point to investigate <span class="hi bold">digital humanities research practices</span> determined by the
                     aspects of infrastructure (material and nonmaterial), social interaction
                     (communication and collaboration), and context (regional, social, and cultural).
                     Our perspective on DH research practices stems from the observation of three
                     significant changes in the field’s development, entangled with physical and
                     virtual dimensions: institutionalization, globalization, and collaboration.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p6">6</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p6"> The first challenges are related to the <span class="hi bold">institutionalization</span> of DH, infrastructural transformations, and the
                     location of DH activities at the university campus. Over the recent years, DH
                     has been rapidly developing, moving from a “set of practices”
                     toward an independent field [<a class="ref" href="#klein2016">Klein and Gold                     2016</a>] through the establishment
                     of DH centers [<a class="ref" href="#flanders2002">Flanders and Unsworth 2002</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#zorich2008">Zorich 2008</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#fraistat2012">Fraistat 2012</a>] and laboratories. Some research centers have been
                     converted into departments offering a number of different programs at the
                     postgraduate level (e.g., the Centre for Computing in the Humanities was renamed
                     the King’s College Department of Digital Humanities in 2011), while some have
                     launched separate laboratories like King’s Digital Lab, formed as an independent
                     unit in 2015 and closely affiliated with the Department of Digital Humanities at
                     King’s College London. Thus, DH, in a certain sense, has been transformed from
                     practice <em class="emph">space</em> to a physical <em class="emph">place</em> operating as
                     center, department, and laboratory.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p7">7</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p7"> The function of the infrastructural turn that has occurred in the DH area is to
                     be an “agent of change,” as Neil Fraistat rightly
                     called it in the context of the DH center [<a class="ref" href="#fraistat2012">Fraistat 2012</a>]. The
                     growing number of humanities labs thus raises the questions of the role of new
                     physical places in the humanities and new research practices formed by a
                     laboratory structure. In contrast to early versions of DH places, the laboratory
                     model can function both as a physical working place (e.g., the Franke Family
                     Digital Humanities Laboratory at Yale University Library) and a virtual research
                     environment (e.g., HuNI — Humanities Networked Infrastructure — a virtual
                     laboratory of the Australian government’s NeCTAR — National e-Research
                     Collaboration Tools and Resources — program). This multifunctionality of
                     laboratories affects DH, which is seen as both a discipline located in a
                     physical place (center, department, and lab) and a set of practices used in
                     various areas (virtual labs, lab courses, and collaboratories).
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p8">8</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p8"> The topics of infrastructural changes and the “laboratorization” of the humanities have been gradually undertaken
                     by researchers in academic [<a class="ref" href="#emersonnd">Emerson et al.                     n.d.</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#earhart2015">Earhart 2015</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#svensson2010">Svensson 2010</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#foka2017">Foka et al. 2017</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#kitch2017">Kitch 2017</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#lane2017">Lane 2017</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#pawlicka2017">Pawlicka 2017</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#smithies2017">Smithies et al. 2017</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#pask2018">Pask 2018</a>] and nonacademic publications [<a class="ref" href="#hiatt2005">Hiatt 2005</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#joselow2016">Joselow 2016</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#breithaupt2017">Breithaupt 2017</a>]. Furthermore, it is worth noting conferences and
                     workshops devoted to institutional transformations in the humanities, such as
                     “Building the Humanities Lab: Scholarly Practices in
                     Virtual Research Environments,” the panel session in the Digital
                     Humanities Conference held at King’s College London in 2010; the “Theories and Practices of the Literary Lab” roundtable
                     at the Modern Language Association National Meeting in Boston in 2013; “The Hum Lab: A Consortial Workshop” organized by the
                     Hurford Center for the Arts and Humanities at Haverford College in 2014; “The Humanities Laboratory: Discussions of New Campus
                     Models” conference organized by Arizona State University’s Institute
                     for Humanities Research at the National Endowment for the Humanities in 2016;
                     “Digital Humanities Forum: Places, Spaces, Sites:
                     Mapping Critical Intersections in Digital Humanities,” which took
                     place at the Institute for Digital Research in the Humanities at the University
                     of Kansas in 2016; “Reimagining the Humanities Lab,”
                     the panel discussion at the ADHO Conference in 2018; “Making
                     Change through the Humanities: Institutes, Ideas and Infrastructures”
                     workshop at the Royal Institute of Technology in Stockholm in 2018; “What Is a Feminist Lab?” symposium at the University of
                     Colorado, Boulder in 2019; “Humanities Laboratories:
                     Critical Infrastructures and Knowledge Experiments” workshop at
                     King’s College London in 2019; “Rebuilding
                     Laboratories” workshop at the Institute of Advanced Studies of the
                     University of Birmingham in 2019, and “The Architecture of
                     Science and the Humanities” workshop held at Netherlands Institute
                     for Advanced Study in 2019. These activities show that the issues of place and
                     space for DH research practices are becoming more and more significant in the
                     face of DH’s institutional changes and the emergence of new research
                     environments like virtual labs. Physical and virtual spaces entail particular
                     research practices, the form of collaboration, and the manner of knowledge
                     production.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p9">9</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p9"> The second noticeable change in the DH area is a turn toward
                     internationalization and the <span class="hi bold">global development</span> of the
                     field. DH has been established all over the world through research centers [<a class="ref" href="#centernet">centerNet n.d.</a>] and laboratories, increasingly extending beyond
                     Western countries. The issue of global DH is garnering more attention, and it
                     suffices to mention the annual international conference of the Alliance of
                     Digital Humanities Organizations (ADHO) with the special theme of Global Digital
                     Humanities held at the University of Western Sydney in 2015, the annual Global
                     Digital Humanities Symposium held at Michigan State University since 2016, the
                     Global Outlook::Digital Humanities (GO::DH) Special Interest Group at the ADHO,
                     and the call for papers for a book entitled <cite class="title italic">Global Debates
                        in the Digital Humanities</cite>
                     [<a class="ref" href="#fiormonte">Fiormonte et                     al. n.d.</a>], a part of the Debates in the Digital Humanities
                     Series published by the University of Minnesota Press. The process of DH
                     globalization involves a number of research inquiries entangled with the
                     concepts of place and space such as global DH infrastructure, global virtual
                     collaboration and networks, and a local physical place immersed in the regional,
                     social, and cultural environment. DH research practices are thus both globalized
                     and determined by the local situatedness.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p10">10</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p10"> The last observation that drives us to study the DH research practices related
                     to the concepts of space is the creation of new forms of <span class="hi bold">collaboration and communication</span> through platforms (Slack, Zoom,
                     Github, Trello, or Google Drive), social media (Twitter), and virtual research
                     environments (TextGridLab). These tools have given rise to the development of a
                     new model of cooperation and dissemination of research, taking place in physical
                     and virtual environments (e.g. “Making Connections”
                     was the first Humanities Commons Twitter conference in 2019). The collaboration
                     processes have both spatial and temporal dimensions; therefore, we suggest
                     examining research practices occurring in temporary events, the durability of
                     established collaboration, the opportunity for creating global collaboration,
                     and the research ethics related to virtual cooperation, and more. The various
                     digital research tools that DH scholars use and develop can be seen as spaces
                     requiring a certain type of data organization, working methods, language skills,
                     and cultural understanding to function properly. Simultaneously, particularly
                     those analysis programs that are easy to use or that facilitate easy learning
                     can become widely used only because of the access and not necessarily because of
                     the high-quality analysis.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p11">11</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p11">The above changes and observations, related to the concepts of <em class="emph">place</em>
                     and <em class="emph">space</em>, present the <span class="hi bold">digital humanities research
                        as situated practices</span>. The development of infrastructure in the
                     humanities and the establishment of laboratory places have led to the
                     transformation of the humanities toward a situated field [<a class="ref" href="#emersonnd">Emerson et al.                     n.d.</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#svensson2015">Svensson                     2015</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#purdy2017">Purdy and                     DeVoss 2017</a>] entangled with physical and virtual environments. The
                     research process occurring in a particular place becomes as significant as the
                     outcome of a study. A laboratory draws attention to the place where work is
                     constructed, focusing on research practices, structures, devices, and workplace
                     design. The shift toward situated practices is the vital context for the
                     investigation of place in DH since it opens up the discussion on the issue of
                     research practices in a specific environment, employing tools and materials in
                     space, design space, research collaboration, and the spatial representation of
                     practice. Hence, contributors to this special issue discuss different forms of
                     situatedness: institutional, local, regional, national, geographical,
                     socio-cultural, and virtual.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p12">12</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p12">As more scholars become engaged with DH research all over the world, and the
                     organizational structures of the sites of digital humanities is developing fast,
                     we need to look at the concepts of <em class="emph">place</em> and <em class="emph">space</em>
                     that significantly affect the research culture. Therefore, this special issue
                     brings these scattered discussions together and examines the situatedness of DH
                     research practices in wider terms.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Situated Research Practices in Digital Humanities</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p13">13</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p13">The articles in this special issue examine the different aspects of the <span class="hi bold">situated research practices</span> of the DH, covering two
                     perspectives, respectively referring to the title of <cite class="title italic">Lab
                        and Slack</cite>: physical and virtual places of DH research. The <span class="hi bold">physical</span> places of research refer to the various DH
                     laboratories and centers all over the world and more widely to the surroundings
                     that a location in a particular city, country, or continent gives to DH
                     research. As for the <span class="hi bold">virtual</span> environments of DH research,
                     we define the digital internet-based collaboration platforms that enable
                     research and scholarly collaboration. We propose thinking through the
                     location-based research practices and digital collaboration forms of the DH
                     research to explore the role of spatiality in locating the field, facilitating
                     digital practices, changing the nature of research, and fostering collaboration.
                     The issue explores spatial transformations and the architecture of the DH to
                     examine how the organization of DH research, the materiality, and social
                     practices are bound with a place where researchers interact, material devices
                     are collected, and knowledge is constructed. It also seeks to respond to the
                     question of how the spatiality and organization of space can prevent or
                     complicate high-quality DH research.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p14">14</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p14">The aspects that influence DH research in both physical and virtual places are
                     (1) infrastructures, (2) the research and collaboration practices the places
                     facilitate, (3) the social and cultural contexts relevant in that place, and (4)
                     the temporality. These aspects influence one another, and changes in one can
                     affect the others. All these aspects affect what is studied, the ways research
                     can be done and, in the end, the results of our knowledge, what kind of
                     knowledge DH research can provide.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p15">15</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p15">The infrastructures (1) set, for example, the position of a lab in the university
                     organization, its funding, collaboration premises, the material devices, and
                     digital resources it can offer. Further, in virtual platforms, there are
                     material infrastructures, such as the capacity of the used devices, the strength
                     of the internet connection, and the setting conditions. In addition, in virtual
                     platforms, the algorithmic design defines what kinds of collaboration and
                     research practices are possible in that place, how all the used platforms
                     communicate with one another, and how easy it is to organize the used data and
                     identify the significant discussions as the project proceeds.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p16">16</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p16">The research and collaboration practices (2) are less-tangible aspects of the
                     situated DH research. Both in a laboratory setting and on a virtual
                     collaboration platform certain research methods are favored over the others, the
                     division of labor and collaboration is designed following a certain logic, and
                     the meetings are structured in a certain way. The research and collaboration
                     practices influence the ways information processing and filtering proceeds and
                     potentially what ideas become crystallized, and which are left aside.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p17">17</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p17">Additionally, the social and cultural context (3) plays a significant role both
                     in the DH centers and in virtual platforms. Location of a lab in a particular
                     city and, for example, proximity or distance to other DH institutions or the IT
                     industry, the accessibility, quantity and quality of digital data on local
                     issues, or legislation all influence the functions of a DH lab. The virtual
                     collaboration platforms enable global collaboration and encounters between
                     scholars with diverse backgrounds. To avoid misunderstandings, the communication
                     in a virtual platform must be very explicit in the cases where there is no, or
                     very limited, physical contact. The social and cultural context also raises the
                     important questions of accessibility: who feels welcomed and socially accepted
                     in a DH space and who does not, and what kinds of disciplinary backgrounds or
                     research topics are favored over the others?
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p18">18</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p18">The temporal (4) dimension also matters: to meet people, you need to be in the
                     right place at the right moment. Virtual collaboration is also bound to time,
                     both in projects collaborating across time zones and in more mundane questions
                     of the virtual collaborators’ preferred working rhythms.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p19">19</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p19">The special issue divides the situated research practices into physical and
                     virtual for the sake of analysis, but we acknowledge that, in reality, these
                     aspects often overlap. Several articles in this special issue point out that the
                     physical and digital actually overlap, and it is often practically impossible to
                     separate them from each other [see, for example, <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000480/000480.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000480/000480.html'); return false" class="ref">El
                        Khatib et al.</a>]. The underlying assumption of this special issue is
                     that DH research is very much a collaborative effort. Although we acknowledge
                     that there is also excellent DH research done by individual scholars, they are
                     often associated with a physical or virtual DH environment and the discussions
                     there.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p20">20</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p20">The articles in this special issue are grouped into two main clusters that
                     represent a unified set of themes: Cluster 1: “Physical
                     Situatedness, Digital/Humanities Labs, and Infrastructure” with a
                     subcluster “Digital Humanities Lab: Case Studies” and
                     Cluster 2: “Virtual Situatedness, Digital Practices, and
                     Collaboration”.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">Cluster 1: Physical Situatedness, Digital/Humanities Labs, and
                        Infrastructure
                     </h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p21">21</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p21">A discussion of the mutual relations between situatedness, infrastructure,
                        and digital/humanities practices has been largely unexplored so far. We
                        rarely think about DH in the context of physical place; however, this
                        material aspect of work has a strong influence on the way the research is
                        conducted and produced. A physical place involves affiliation, architecture,
                        design, organization, policy, and equipment. It is located in a particular
                        environment (local, regional, and national) that affects its development and
                        operation. All these features shape the condition, possibilities, and
                        constraints of doing scholarly works. They can both stimulate and disturb
                        the research work and drive and limit interdisciplinarity and collaboration,
                        as well as facilitate and hinder the transfer of knowledge. Hence, this
                        cluster opens a number of interesting perspectives on the complexities of
                        situated research practices. Contributors offer intellectual engagement with
                        critical thoughts on the role of socio-material infrastructure in the
                        humanities practices. The purpose of this section is to provide a
                        theoretical framework for the discussion and understanding of the impact of
                        situatedness on the production and transmission of scholarly knowledge.
                        Authors use a wide range of theoretical tools to present various approaches
                        to undertaking this research inquiry. The analyses lie at the intersections
                        of infrastructure studies (see <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000463/000463.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000463/000463.html'); return false" class="ref">Guldi</a>; <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000466/000466.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000466/000466.html'); return false" class="ref">Pawlicka-Deger</a>; <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000468/000468.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000468/000468.html'); return false" class="ref">Kil</a>; <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000471/000471.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000471/000471.html'); return false" class="ref">Shanmugapriya and Menon</a>), critical analysis of the infrastructure
                        design (see <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000463/000463.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000463/000463.html'); return false" class="ref">Guldi</a>), the archaeology of humanities infrastructure (see <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000468/000468.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000468/000468.html'); return false" class="ref">Kil</a>), digital humanities and science and technology studies (see
                        <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000465/000465.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000465/000465.html'); return false" class="ref">Malazita, Teboul and Rafeh</a>), laboratory studies (see <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000465/000465.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000465/000465.html'); return false" class="ref">Malazita, Teboul and Rafeh</a>; <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000466/000466.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000466/000466.html'); return false" class="ref">Pawlicka-Deger</a>), interdisciplinary studies (see Oiva), and
                        knowledge production and transfer (see <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000464/000464.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000464/000464.html'); return false" class="ref">Oiva</a>; <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000471/000471.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000471/000471.html'); return false" class="ref">Shanmugapriya and Menon</a>). This broad theoretical perspective
                        shows how digital/humanities practices become conditioned by a university’s
                        organizational structure, infrastructure, and digital technologies.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p22">22</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p22">Here, the authors discuss the complexities and the agency of infrastructure,
                        which organization and design are socially constructed and embedded within
                        the larger culture of critical thinking about technology and culture (see
                        <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000463/000463.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000463/000463.html'); return false" class="ref">Guldi</a>). The contributors argue that the infrastructure is engaged
                        with existing thought about power, represents a form of scholarly
                        argumentation (see <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000463/000463.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000463/000463.html'); return false" class="ref">Guldi</a>), and produces epistemic objects through the boundaries
                        drawn around what makes an object knowable (see <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000465/000465.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000465/000465.html'); return false" class="ref">Malazita, Teboul and Rafeh</a>). They show how the infrastructure,
                        the laboratory apparatus, the socio-material assemblages, and the virtual
                        are in a co-constitutive relationship; they all produce one another,
                        participating in one another’s existence (see <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000465/000465.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000465/000465.html'); return false" class="ref">Malazita, Teboul and Rafeh</a>). Further, the authors demonstrate how
                        the location, design, and facilities are significant components of the
                        infrastructure models that are differentiated by operation and function.
                        Each model for laboratory structure entails different research practices,
                        methods, and actions, and consequently, produces a specific knowledge (see
                        <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000466/000466.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000466/000466.html'); return false" class="ref">Pawlicka-Deger</a>). The mechanisms of knowledge production and
                        transfer are particularly dependent on the infrastructure that facilitates
                        and shapes these processes. The authors show how DH centers enable
                        interdisciplinary knowledge transfer, foster research practices, and
                        maintain interdisciplinary networks (see <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000464/000464.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000464/000464.html'); return false" class="ref">Oiva</a>). Next, the contributors demonstrate the relationships
                        between the physical situatedness (a location, city, and country) and the
                        knowledge creation and dissemination. The authors present how the location
                        in a prominent city and the proximity to other universities and DH places
                        are essential factors in manufacturing knowledge, facilitating collaboration
                        and driving competition (see <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000464/000464.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000464/000464.html'); return false" class="ref">Oiva</a>; <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000471/000471.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000471/000471.html'); return false" class="ref">Shanmugapriya and Menon</a>; <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000468/000468.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000468/000468.html'); return false" class="ref">Kil</a>). At the same time, the distance from leading institutions
                        and the lack of infrastructure hinder research practices, the transfer of
                        knowledge, and scholarly communication (see <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000471/000471.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000471/000471.html'); return false" class="ref">Shanmugapriya and Menon</a>). The authors claim that the
                        infrastructure plays a critical role in the humanities practices, not only
                        in the DH based on collaborative and interdisciplinary initiatives and
                        access to digital tools and resources, but also in the “analog humanities” that are rarely considered in terms of
                        infrastructure. The authors reveal that the analog files and repositories
                        also affect the research methods and, consequently, they can influence
                        theoretical framework and development (see <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000468/000468.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000468/000468.html'); return false" class="ref">Kil</a>). To summarize, contributors to the first cluster present
                        various perspectives and theoretical tools for the discussion on the
                        entanglement of the infrastructure and situatedness in the
                        digital/humanities work.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p23">23</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p23"><span class="hi bold">Jo Guldi</span>’s essay, “Scholarly
                        Infrastructure as Critical Argument,” presents critical
                        reflections on the design of infrastructure. Guldi argues that the
                        infrastructure designers are engaging in critical argumentation with their
                        tools, and proposes the principles of critical thinking about the
                        infrastructure that define the “culture of
                        infrastructure”. The criteria show evidence of critical thinking
                        about humanities practice and active imagination of how digital
                        infrastructure can mirror or enhance the traditional values of the
                        humanities — that is, transparency, replicability, and public discourse. The
                        article draws from an autobiographical narrative of the author’s own
                        initiative in the design and building of a piece of infrastructure called
                        Paper Machines. Based on personal experience, the author determines a set of
                        “critical” principles of infrastructure that
                        constitute the kind of interventions that render the invisible visible and
                        stimulates the public purposes and intellectual orientation intended in the
                        building of infrastructure, and the extent to which humanities and social
                        science critiques of the flow of information and power in society have
                        resulted in the creation of alternative or transformative flows.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p24">24</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p24"><span class="hi bold">Urszula Pawlicka-Deger</span>, in the article “The Laboratory Turn: Exploring Discourses, Landscapes, and
                        Models of Humanities Labs,” reflects on a laboratory boom that
                        has occurred in the humanities area over the past years. With the
                        multiplication and diversification of laboratories at university campuses,
                        in city spaces, and in cultural institutions, it is essential to analyze the
                        stimulus of the laboratories’ emergence and understand their conditions,
                        meanings, and functions. The paper begins with the investigation of three
                        discourses that gave rise to the formation of a laboratory in the
                        humanities: the transformation of the humanities infrastructure within the
                        university, the paradigm shifts in the social sciences, and the expansion of
                        cultural categories (innovation, the maker movement, and the idea of
                        community). Further, Pawlicka-Deger reflects on the definition of the
                        humanities lab and presents a history of the laboratory in the humanities.
                        Next, the author analyzes five models for humanities labs (the center-type
                        lab, the techno-science lab, the work station-type lab, the social
                        challenges-centric lab, and virtual lab) and shows how their situatedness,
                        structure, and function entail different ways of knowledge production. The
                        essay indicates the role of digital humanities as the driving force behind
                        building a laboratory space, which promotes a culture of experimentation and
                        collaboration. The author shows that the humanities lab does not imitate the
                        science lab but adapts this new infrastructure for its own purposes and
                        needs.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p25">25</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p25"><span class="hi bold">James W. Malazita, Ezra J. Teboul, and Hined Rafeh</span>’s
                        article “Digital Humanities as Epistemic Cultures: How
                        DH Labs Make Knowledge, Objects, and Subjects” examines a DH lab
                        from the perspective of science and technology studies and laboratory
                        studies. The central thesis of this essay is that the concept of the “situatedness” of DH labs extends beyond
                        physical/institutional space and also includes epistemic, political,
                        sociological, and disciplinary issues. The authors outline the
                        constructivist model of laboratory knowledge practices developed through
                        feminist laboratory studies, and how that model’s focus on the laboratory as
                        a producer of research subjects, rather than a container for them, runs
                        counter to narratives about laboratories in DH. The authors argue for the
                        construction of DH laboratories as epistemic cultures that produce epistemic
                        objects and subjects — objects of inquiry and the practitioners who study
                        those objects — as well as provide the conditions and infrastructures that
                        make legitimate DH research. The analysis is based on a case study of the
                        Tactical Humanities Lab at Rensselaer, an innovative DH lab established in a
                        seemingly nonhumanities environment that is Rensselaer Polytechnic
                        Institute. The essay thus presents the DH lab situated within the area of
                        science and technology studies and addresses the issues of its identity,
                        location, and the social construction of laboratory work boundaries.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p26">26</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p26"><span class="hi bold">Mila Oiva</span> in her article “The Chili
                        and Honey of Digital Humanities Research” examines DH centers
                        from the perspective of an interdisciplinary knowledge transfer, which she
                        argues as being one of the core elements of DH research. Based on interviews
                        of the directors, researchers, and administrators of established DH centers,
                        she explores how these DH professionals describe the facilitation of
                        interdisciplinary knowledge transfer in DH centers. The article discusses
                        the way knowledge transfer facilitates and influences the knowledge
                        production in the field. The article points out that the transfer of
                        knowledge in DH centers is based on overlapping layers of organic networks
                        and stable organizational structures that support various kinds of
                        knowledge-sharing practices. Knowledge transfer in DH centers combines an
                        exchange of ideas in the same place physically and online communication at
                        various network layers, ranging from outside academia to internal
                        communication between a research group. The factors that enable information
                        flows also have the capability of restricting potentially meaningful
                        information from entering to the field.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p27">27</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p27"><span class="hi bold">Aleksandra Kil</span> in the article “Excavating Infrastructure in the Analog Humanities’ Lab”
                        investigates Claude Lévi-Strauss’s <cite class="title italic">Laboratoire
                           d’anthropologie sociale</cite> as a case study of the archaeology of
                        the humanities laboratory. The author provides an in-depth analysis of the
                        Laboratory of Social Anthropology (LAS) established in the Collège de France
                        in 1960, linking DH with structuralism and structural anthropology. Kil
                        discusses the physical situatedness of the LAS, the pragmatic and
                        entrepreneurial side of its workings, and how this lab was initially
                        organized around its prominent research apparatus, the Human Relations Area
                        Files, a vast pre-electronic ethnographical database produced at Yale. Kil
                        situates the LAS in the framework of the analog humanities and in the
                        discussion on the infrastructure in the humanities. The article thus
                        examines the infrastructural features of the analog humanities lab, which
                        are not recognized as easily as in the case of contemporary digital labs.
                        Kil excavates the origins of the research infrastructure as we know it: a
                        lab, repository, catalog, and database. Drawing on theories of media
                        archaeology and critical infrastructure studies, the article opens new
                        research inquiries in the scope of the archaeology of the humanities
                        infrastructure.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p28">28</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p28"><span class="hi bold">Shanmugapriya T. and Nirmala Menon</span> discuss in “Infrastructure and Social Interaction: Situated Research
                        Practices in Digital Humanities in India” the present state of DH
                        in India. The authors address the challenges related to DH infrastructure
                        and interdisciplinary research collaboration in India by mapping the latest
                        Indian DH hot spots in interviews and a survey. The unevenly distributed
                        access to physical infrastructures and structural obstacles to
                        interdisciplinary and interorganizational collaboration create challenges
                        for DH research. The authors also demonstrate how the narrow integration of
                        humanists and computer scientists is still a challenge. The diverging career
                        expectations and interests of the potential collaborators, as well as the
                        lack of technical know-how among the humanists, create obstacles in a
                        country with “millions of software engineers.”
                        Further, digital infrastructures still do not always support, for example,
                        the computational analysis of several Indian languages. This absorbing and
                        needed essay provides an important opportunity to advance the understanding
                        of how geographical, cultural, and physical situatedness affect the
                        advancement of DH. It also makes an important contribution to the field of
                        global DH.
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">Digital Humanities Lab: Case Studies</h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p29">29</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p29">Building a DH space requires a proper infrastructure, facilities,
                        institutional regulations, funding, policy, community, and many more
                        components that direct the development strategy, form a research
                        environment, and shape the identity of the place. These components also
                        construct and constitute the borders of the space, which raises the
                        questions of inclusion and exclusion and affects the way of establishing a
                        local DH community and people’s sense of belonging to the space. Place
                        attachment made by policy, representation, and symbolic gestures is
                        accompanied by a negative side of place identity that is exclusion. The
                        question is whether a DH venue creates a mechanism to exclude people from
                        that place and, thereby, from the field. This investigation takes us back to
                        a long-lasting discussion regarding belonging to the DH area; now, we return
                        to this debate to pose the question about the role of place in building a
                        sense of attachment and exclusion. Further, the DH venue is embodied in the
                        surrounding environment, which has a strong impact on its operation,
                        function, and practices. In light of the ongoing discussions on the locality
                        of DH, the time is ripe to consider the conditions of establishing a site
                        and the aspects of making a unique place reflecting the local flavor.
                        Therefore, this cluster offers deep insight into the mechanism of creating
                        and sustaining a DH space.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p30">30</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p30">The articles fit squarely into the “Building a DH
                        Center” genre; however, they do more than simply summarize the
                        ways of establishing a local DH place: the contributors, who are the core
                        and engine of the DH — scholars, practitioners, and students — share their
                        personal experience and memories related to building and maintaining a DH
                        place. These workpieces present absorbing stories of successes and failures,
                        opportunities and obstacles, affections and frustrations. The authors reveal
                        critical issues related to the sustainability of a DH place controlled by
                        the local administrative decisions, budgetary priorities, the nature of the
                        industry, and higher education (see <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000470/000470.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000470/000470.html'); return false" class="ref">Cummings, Roh and Callaway</a>; <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000473/000473.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000473/000473.html'); return false" class="ref">Berens, Gaterud and Noorda</a>). They pose crucial questions of how
                        the place’s location and institutional affiliations can both drive and
                        hinder interdisciplinary collaboration (see <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000472/000472.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000472/000472.html'); return false" class="ref">Fickers and Heijden</a>). They also disclose significant problems of
                        accessibility and physical constraints arising from the design and size of a
                        place (see <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000478/000478.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000478/000478.html'); return false" class="ref">Phillips et al.</a>). Further, the authors demonstrate how the
                        architecture of space plays a crucial role in driving the research process,
                        stimulating creativity and engagement, and also ensuring security and
                        transparency (see <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000479/000479.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000479/000479.html'); return false" class="ref">DeRose and Leonard</a>). Hence, the authors discuss how the physical
                        and virtual situatedness define and delimit ways of conducting research,
                        establishing a community, and interacting with people (see <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000470/000470.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000470/000470.html'); return false" class="ref">Cummings, Roh and Callaway</a>; <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000478/000478.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000478/000478.html'); return false" class="ref">Phillips et al.</a>; <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000472/000472.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000472/000472.html'); return false" class="ref">Fickers and Heijden</a>). Contributors show how essential it is to
                        shape the identity of a place that resonates with the local and regional
                        environment (see <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000470/000470.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000470/000470.html'); return false" class="ref">Cummings, Roh and Callaway</a>; <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000473/000473.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000473/000473.html'); return false" class="ref">Berens, Gaterud and Noorda</a>) and how important it is to create a
                        sense of place and a culture of connectedness for the community situated as
                        a group in one collaborative working space (see <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000472/000472.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000472/000472.html'); return false" class="ref">Fickers and Heijden</a>). This cluster reveals the ongoing tensions
                        between the vertical structure of the administrative and economic landscape
                        of the university in which a place is situated and the horizontal structure
                        of the community that is the place’s soul and engine. Even though DH spaces
                        struggle with funding, facilities, and proper location, the most significant
                        aspect is the community that fulfills a place, measures its functionality,
                        and brings the place to life. Similarly, if a center does not engage the
                        community and draw a critical mass of scholars and students, administrative
                        and technological supports alone are not enough to make the place
                        successful. The sense of belonging to the community is thus one of the key
                        elements of creating a place, and it can ensure its sustainability,
                        enjoyment, and success. Therefore, given the growth of DH institutions,
                        centers, and labs, it is important that we discuss such issues now, collect
                        experience, and provide recommendations that can guide and support the
                        future attempts to build a DH place.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p31">31</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p31"><span class="hi bold">Catherine DeRose and Peter Leonard</span> in the essay “Digital Humanities on Reserve: From Reading Room to
                        Laboratory at Yale University Library” present the history of
                        space in the Sterling Memorial Library of Yale University from 1931 to 2019
                        and its transformation along with the development of DH. The history of the
                        newest scholarly support environments at Yale, namely the Franke Family
                        Digital Humanities Laboratory, renovated in 2019, dates back to 1931 when a
                        Reserve Book Reading Room was designed in an elaborate Early English
                        Renaissance style. The authors describe the structural, aesthetic, and
                        programmatic transformations of a space that aimed to facilitate, drive, and
                        mirror DH practices. The article examines the role of the design library,
                        architecture, and policy interventions in building and fostering the DH
                        field. The transformation of the space in Sterling Memorial Library involved
                        new ways of thinking about location, materiality, transparency, security,
                        and collaboration. DeRose and Leonard present the efforts of designing a
                        suitable place for DH practices as well as the challenges of an adaptive
                        reuse of a historic (and historicizing) space, which is undoubtedly
                        different from the process of renovating a newer, less decorative facility
                        or constructing a completely new room.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p32">32</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p32"><span class="hi bold">Rebekah Cummings, David S. Roh, and Elizabeth Callaway</span>
                        in the article “Organic and Locally Sourced: Growing a
                        Digital Humanities Lab with an Eye Towards Sustainability”
                        present a history and process of building a DH center at the University of
                        Utah. The authors take readers back to 2009, when the first Digital
                        Scholarship Lab was established, aiming at bringing together scholars
                        engaged in digital scholarship practices from different parts of campus.
                        Despite early administrative buy-in, staff enthusiasm, and technological
                        support, the lab failed. After this unsuccessful effort, the second attempt
                        to create a DH center was rooted in skepticism. The authors show the path of
                        the second lab’s formation: the Digital Matters Lab launched in 2017. Based
                        on this experience, the authors share lessons of building a DH lab, which
                        can be summarized in three bullet points: 1) a lab is a community that
                        should be reflected in an active, vibrant space; 2) strong relationships
                        with a supportive administration is vital to success; and 3) the lab’s
                        mission should be driven by local needs. The authors further examine these
                        factors and present how the Digital Matters Lab navigates complex
                        institutional legacies and fosters a formal center with a cross-campus
                        partnership, mission, and identity. The article concludes by looking to the
                        future of the Digital Matters Lab and its goals for the upcoming years,
                        including sustainability, a regional identity, and campus integration.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p33">33</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p33"><span class="hi bold">Andreas Fickers and Tim van der Heijden</span> reflect
                        critically in “Inside the Trading Zone: Thinkering in a
                        Digital History Lab” on the practical and epistemological
                        challenges of doing historical research in the digital age. Their analysis
                        is based on a case study of the Digital History Lab and its Doctoral
                        Training Unit (DTU) on “Digital History and
                        Hermeneutics,” an interdisciplinary research and training program
                        established at the Luxembourg Centre for Contemporary and Digital History
                        (C²DH) of the University of Luxembourg. The article examines the DTU as an
                        interdisciplinary trading zone that applies the method of “thinkering” — the term that merges the tinkering
                        with technology with the critical reflection on the practice of doing
                        digital history. Drawing on this case study, the essay addresses significant
                        questions related to how interdisciplinary trading zones are being
                        constituted in practice, and how they are situated in physical working
                        environments. The authors investigate the role of a physical space in
                        forming a trading zone from the perspectives of the spatial and
                        organizational framework of the DTU, experiences of the DTU doctoral
                        candidates, and the usage of digital methods and tools in situated digital
                        history research. The article constitutes an important contribution to the
                        discussion on “interdisciplining digital
                        humanities.”
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p34">34</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p34"><span class="hi bold">Natalie Phillips, Alexander Babbitt, Soohyun Cho, Jessica
                           Kane, Cody Mejeur, and Craig Pearson</span>’s essay “Creating Spaces for Interdisciplinary Research across Literature,
                        Neuroscience, and DH” gives a deep insight into the meaning of
                        interdisciplinarity in practice and the building of a space for supporting
                        cross-disciplinary works. The reflections are based on a case study of the
                        Digital Humanities and Literary Cognition Lab (DHLC) founded at Michigan
                        State University in 2012. The authors share their experiences, memories, and
                        research projects on “literary neuroscience”
                        lying at the intersection of DH and cognitive studies. The essay aims to
                        reinterpret the interdisciplinarity that is not limited to the discussion of
                        collaboration between different fields but, instead, involves a culture of
                        “chaotic space full of work, odd debates, and
                        fun.” This chaotic place is built by the people who represent
                        divergent disciplines and positions, enjoy different kinds of music, and
                        share common jokes. This case study shows that a laboratory is constituted
                        by people who are ready to take a risk, spend every moment in the lab, and
                        overcome any constraints. The authors summarize the most important lessons
                        they learned along the way, including the importance of the lab’s
                        nonhierarchical structure, serendipitous accidents, and the joy of working
                        in a group. This essay presents how a lab can expand beyond experiments into
                        a unified and unrivaled community.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p35">35</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p35"><span class="hi bold">Kathi Inman Berens, Abbey Gaterud, and Rachel Noorda</span>’s
                        article “Ooligan Press: Building and Sustaining a
                        Feminist Digital Humanities Lab at a R-2” presents an original
                        model for DH infrastructure that is a lab operating under market conditions.
                        Ooligan Press is a not-for-profit book publishing lab where students of
                        Portland State University collectively own and operate the publishing house.
                        The history of Ooligan Press itself is an atypical example of a DH lab that
                        became a large-scale structured entity through a set of accidental and
                        atypical environments: backdoor founding, little funding, accidental
                        national distribution, and curriculum integration. This atypical environment
                        is part of what made the existence of Ooligan Press possible, what shaped
                        its characteristics, and what makes the press difficult to replicate in a
                        top-down DH lab model as opposed to the grassroots, bottom-up approach that
                        led to Ooligan’s success. The authors pose significant questions, rarely
                        discussed in the context of labs: How to connect the lab’s output
                        holistically to the communities it serves? What’s the role of a lab in
                        helping students achieve learning outcomes they seek when they enroll in a
                        degree program? The essay examines the lab using the M.E.A.L.S. framework
                        developed by Elizabeth Losh and Jacqueline Wernimont, that is, Materiality,
                        Embodiment, Affect, Labor, and Situatedness. The authors show how overwork
                        and passion are intertwined and how significant it is to build a community,
                        a group of people who can work together, support one another in stressful
                        situations, and share both the success and failure.
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">Cluster 2: Virtual Situatedness, Digital Practices, and
                        Collaboration
                     </h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p36">36</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p36">Alongside the physical places, DH research takes place in digital
                        collaboration and analysis platforms. As DH often involves teamwork and the
                        usage of research “materials” in a digitally shareable
                        form (data, code, visualizations), research practices are increasingly
                        performing in a digital manner. The algorithmic choices of the research
                        tools and collaboration platforms create architectural shapes that direct
                        our doings in the digital spaces. We discuss at Zoom and Skype meetings,
                        organize the workflow through Slack and Trello, share materials through
                        Github and Dropbox, and cowrite papers in Google Drive and LaTeX. We also
                        develop new research tools and pipelines and modify their uses to suit our
                        purposes. Being built by humans, the digital collaboration and analysis
                        software contain cultural and spatial structures that enable one kind of
                        activity and constrain another. Utilization of virtual collaborative spaces
                        sets us partially free from geographical constraints but simultaneously ties
                        us to other kinds of spatial and cultural dimensions. To communicate
                        effectively in a digital platform, one must learn the internal communication
                        culture of that channel.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p37">37</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p37">The articles in this cluster study virtual situatedness, collaboration,
                        organizational structures and research practices from various perspectives.
                        They address virtual situatedness by exploring how DH community structures
                        are being shaped by the call for openness (<a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000480/000480.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000480/000480.html'); return false" class="ref">El
                           Khatib et al.</a>) and showing how digital collaboration tools can
                        provide spaces for building and maintaining affective networks (see <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000474/000474.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000474/000474.html'); return false" class="ref">Evalyn et al.</a>). Being nonphysical, digital platforms enable the
                        easy establishment of a multitude of different kinds of
                        “rooms” for different purposes. Although it is easy
                        to start a group in Facebook, Trello, or Slack, to maintain it and make it
                        flourish demands conscious development of research and collaboration
                        practices (see <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000474/000474.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000474/000474.html'); return false" class="ref">Evalyn et al.</a>). Several articles in this cluster demonstrate
                        that, although the architecture of digital research and collaboration tools
                        push toward certain kinds of usage, the users themselves establish different
                        practices and employ the tools in the ways that best support their needs
                        (see <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000474/000474.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000474/000474.html'); return false" class="ref">Evalyn et al.</a>; <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000477/000477.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000477/000477.html'); return false" class="ref">Maryl et al.</a>). Virtually situated research practices are often
                        imagined in a form of a chain of problems and solution choices. This chain
                        can appear either in the creative usage of various tools (see <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000477/000477.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000477/000477.html'); return false" class="ref">Maryl et al.</a>) or by using the concept of a pipeline, with the
                        possibility to adjust different parts of the pipeline to better fit the
                        purposes of the study (see <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000481/000481.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000481/000481.html'); return false" class="ref">Lee et al.</a>).
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p38">38</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p38">Research software development is, as Bardiot and Lee et al. demonstrate, a
                        philosophical, technological, and practical evolution process that demands
                        deep knowledge of the domain, the ways data is usually studied, and profound
                        argumentation on how it should be studied (see also <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000463/000463.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000463/000463.html'); return false" class="ref">Guldi</a> in Cluster 1). The ways in which the scholarly
                        infrastructures are built not only influence the research outcomes but can
                        also either facilitate or complicate sharing detailed information on the
                        methods, peer review, and development of the field (see <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000481/000481.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000481/000481.html'); return false" class="ref">Lee et al.</a>). The articles address critical questions regarding
                        the quick obsolescence of digital tools and collaborative spaces. DH work
                        takes place in a constantly evolving and changing environment, as research
                        teams fluctuate over time, and software versions continuously change (see
                        <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000477/000477.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000477/000477.html'); return false" class="ref">Maryl et al.</a>). The digital spaces are constantly changing, and
                        the chat “room” you entered last year might not be there
                        today. What will happen to the conversations that store our ideas and
                        demonstrate valuable collaborative development processes or the research
                        outcomes stored in outdated formats within a few years (see <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000476/000476.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000476/000476.html'); return false" class="ref">Bardiot</a>)? How will we ensure that we will not forget the old
                        knowledge while we are constantly running after the new?
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p39">39</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p39">Further, the articles reveal different needs of functionalities and research
                        and communication practices in different collaborative settings. An
                        individual researcher can conduct research by adjusting a pipeline developed
                        by another scholar (see <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000481/000481.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000481/000481.html'); return false" class="ref">Lee et al.</a>), while a research lab — or a “tree” of labs! —
                        hosting several intersecting research projects, must develop a multichannel
                        exchange of ideas and emotions (see <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000480/000480.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000480/000480.html'); return false" class="ref">El
                           Khatib et al.</a>; <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000474/000474.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000474/000474.html'); return false" class="ref">Evalyn et al.</a>). A research project that involves nonacademic
                        institutions, like the analysis of performing art with the artists, requires
                        a digital platform that allows documentation of the data when the artists
                        create it and preserves it for the scholar for later studies (see <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000476/000476.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000476/000476.html'); return false" class="ref">Bardiot</a>). Digital scholarly collaboration also comes in the forms
                        of openness, transparency, sharing protocols and pipelines, ideas for
                        different functions in a tool, and open source and interdisciplinary
                        exchange of ideas and methods (see <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000480/000480.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000480/000480.html'); return false" class="ref">El
                           Khatib et al.</a>; <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000477/000477.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000477/000477.html'); return false" class="ref">Maryl et al.</a>; <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000481/000481.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000481/000481.html'); return false" class="ref">Lee et al.</a>; <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000476/000476.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000476/000476.html'); return false" class="ref">Bardiot</a>). The increasing amount of data sets new challenges for
                        various fields that need to ponder their approach to vulnerable and
                        heterogenous digital traces (see <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000476/000476.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000476/000476.html'); return false" class="ref">Bardiot</a>) and develop new practices of digital data use (see <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000477/000477.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000477/000477.html'); return false" class="ref">Maryl et al.</a>). Through conscious choices in the practices in a
                        research community, it is possible to develop an affective and supportive
                        digital community (see <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000474/000474.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000474/000474.html'); return false" class="ref">Evalyn et al.</a>), compile information in collaboration, and
                        systematically build on previous findings and comparisons (see<a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000480/000480.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000480/000480.html'); return false" class="ref">El
                           Khatib et al.</a>; <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000476/000476.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000476/000476.html'); return false" class="ref">Bardiot</a>; <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000477/000477.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000477/000477.html'); return false" class="ref">Maryl et al.</a>; <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000481/000481.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000481/000481.html'); return false" class="ref">Lee et al.</a>). The ethical questions of DH are tightly woven
                        together with research practices, for example, in building a research
                        community and collegial support (see <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000474/000474.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000474/000474.html'); return false" class="ref">Evalyn et al.</a>).
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p40">40</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p40"><span class="hi bold">Randa El Khatib, Alyssa Arbuckle, Lynne Siemens, Ray Siemens
                           and Caroline Winter</span> in “An ‘Open Lab?’ The
                        Electronic Textual Cultures Lab in the Evolving Digital Humanities
                        Landscape” begin the Cluster by analyzing the overlapping
                        physical and virtual space of the Canadian Social Knowledge Institute
                        (C-SKI), a major institution coordinating and supporting the Electronic
                        Textual Cultures Laboratory (ETCL), the Digital Humanities Summer Institute
                        (DHSI), and the Implementing New Knowledge Environments (INKE) Partnership
                        in Canada. Dwelling on the concept of <em class="emph">open social scholarship</em>
                        and the assumption of a correlation between the developing knowledge
                        landscape and the structure of an intellectual facility, the article
                        explores the functions of the community. It shows how the community has been
                        structured to support open social scholarship and explores what types of lab
                        infrastructure models, tools and user practices facilitate open social
                        scholarship. For example, a digital platform, the Canadian HSS Commons,
                        enables connecting, collaborating and dissemination of research among
                        academic institutions and with the broader public. The article is an
                        important contribution to our understanding on how the structures of
                        physical and virtual lab spaces can shape scholarly openness to the broader
                        society.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p41">41</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p41"><span class="hi bold">Lawrence Evalyn, C. E. M. Henderson, Julia King, Jessica
                           Lockhart, Laura Mitchell, Suzanne Conklin Akbari</span> in “One Loveheart at a Time: The Language of Emoji and the
                        Building of Affective Community in the Digital Medieval Studies
                        Environment” analyze the Slack usage practices of the Old Books,
                        New Science Lab (OBNS) at the University of Toronto. The article shows how
                        the versatile group of faculty, postdoctoral fellows, graduate students,
                        undergraduates, and digital librarians created channels dedicated to various
                        lab tasks and developed Slack usage practices and
                        “languages” to meet their daily needs. For them,
                        Slack is not just a collaborative tool, it serves as a platform for building
                        and maintaining a powerful affective network that brings together the
                        members of the community. Informal language and rich emoji usage culture —
                        some created by the community members — play a crucial role in sustaining
                        the affective digital community. The article addresses the wider questions
                        of work in neoliberal academic settings and the role of the digital
                        community in helping to cope there. The authors state that their Slack
                        channel reflects the lab’s simultaneously horizontal collaborative nature
                        and the vertical structures that come with working in the university
                        settings. They identify the tension between the horizontal and vertical
                        aspects as productive tension, which has helped them create a community that
                        simultaneously supports both professional productivity and wellbeing.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p42">42</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p42"><span class="hi bold">Clarisse Bardiot</span> describes in “Theatre Analytics: Developing Software for Theatre Research” the
                        genesis and the process of developing the free and open source tools <cite class="title italic">Rekall</cite> and <cite class="title italic">MemoRekall</cite>. Rekall is a digital environment for documenting and
                        analyzing creative digital processes, and MemoRekall is a web-based tool
                        that facilitates rich video annotation. The article discusses how the
                        development process of the tools was initially launched to address research
                        needs in the performing arts, the main objectives set for the tools at the
                        beginning of the project, and how collaboration with various user groups
                        helped deepen and shape the tools’ functionalities. In her article, Bardiot
                        raises crucial questions regarding the preservation and obsolescence of
                        digital traces and the technologies we use, and how new ways of thinking
                        about the data and developing new digital tools can push forward, adding new
                        analytical layers, such as “theater analytics,”
                        to traditional research.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p43">43</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p43"><span class="hi bold">Maciej Maryl, Costis Dallas, Jennifer Edmond, Jessie Labov,
                           Ingrida Kelpšienė, Michelle Doran, Marta Kołodziejska, and Klaudia
                           Grabowska</span> present in “A Case Study Protocol for
                        Meta-Research into Digital Practices in the Humanities” a
                        protocol for the meta-analysis of DH research, based on three pilot studies.
                        In the pilot studies, the Digital Infrastructure for the Arts and Humanities
                        in Europe (DARIAH) and the Digital Methods and Practices Observatory (DiMPO)
                        Working Group identified divergent uses of digital tools and a variety of
                        research practices adjusted to the specific needs of each individual
                        research project. The authors propose a protocol of meta-research that
                        consists of a set of specific methodological guidelines for researchers
                        wishing to study research practices in the humanities. The protocol aims to
                        help the scholars produce comparable research results that will help track
                        and understand novel research practices and assess their impact on scholarly
                        activity. Thus, the article is a step toward establishing a systematic
                        reflection on the implication of the combination of various digital
                        platforms and their using practices to humanities research.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p44">44</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p44"><span class="hi bold">Ashley S. Lee, Poom Chiarawongse, Jo Guldi, and Andras
                           Zsom</span> in “The Role of Critical Thinking in
                        Humanities Infrastructure. The Pipeline Concept with a Study of HaToRI
                        (Hansard Topic Relevance Identifier)” propose the pipeline
                        concept to DH research. Pipeline is a chain of algorithms that processes the
                        selected data using subsequent steps. As each step and used algorithm is
                        documented, usage of the pipeline allows replication of the study,
                        conducting the similar process to another dataset and altering the used
                        algorithms of the process to better suit one’s research. Transparency of the
                        process enables exploring best practices in digital research, where open
                        discussions about tools, their functions and interpretation can turn into
                        informative examples leading to development of the methods. To illustrate
                        how a pipeline works, the authors present the <cite class="title italic">HaToRI</cite> (Hansard Topic Relevance Identifier), an open-source
                        pipeline-based tool for identifying thematically-linked passages in the
                        nineteenth-century debates of Britain's Parliament. They show how a series
                        of algorithms move through the steps of cleaning a corpus, organizing them
                        into topics, and selecting particular topics that are used to extract a
                        subcorpus of interest in HaToRI. The article also gives an example of how
                        the pipeline can be used in studying debates on property in the
                        nineteenth-century British Parliament.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p45">45</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p45">At this point, we would like to thank all the authors for their valuable
                        contributions to this special issue and for their collaboration and
                        patience. We would like to also say a big thank you to the editor-in-chief,
                        Julia Flanders for giving us this wonderful opportunity, the journal editor,
                        Cassandra Cloutier, and other the DHQ editors for their constant help. We
                        also benefited a great deal from many constructive and insightful comments
                        of anonymous reviewers. It has been a great pleasure to work with all of
                        you.
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
               
            </div>
            
            <div id="worksCited">
               <h2>Works Cited</h2>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="breithaupt2017">
                     <!-- close -->Breithaupt 2017</span> Breithaupt, F. “Designing a Lab in the Humanities”, <cite class="title italic">The Chronicle of Higher Education</cite>, February 06, 2017.
                  <a href="http://www.chronicle.com/article/Designing-a-Lab-in-the/239132" onclick="window.open('http://www.chronicle.com/article/Designing-a-Lab-in-the/239132'); return false" class="ref">http://www.chronicle.com/article/Designing-a-Lab-in-the/239132</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="earhart2015">
                     <!-- close -->Earhart 2015</span> Earhart, A. E. “The Digital Humanities as a Laboratory.” In P. Svensson and D. T.
                  Goldberg (eds). <cite class="title italic">Between Humanities and the Digital</cite>,
                  MA. MIT Press, Cambridge and London (2015), pp. 391-400.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="emersonnd">
                     <!-- close -->Emerson et al.                     n.d.</span> Emerson,
                  L., Parikka, J., Wershler, D. <cite class="title italic">The Lab Book. Situated
                     Practices in Media Studies</cite>. University of Minnesota Press. <a href="https://manifold.umn.edu/projects/the-lab-book" onclick="window.open('https://manifold.umn.edu/projects/the-lab-book'); return false" class="ref">https://manifold.umn.edu/projects/the-lab-book</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="fiormonte">
                     <!-- close -->Fiormonte et                     al. n.d.</span> Fiormonte
                  D., Chaudhuri S., Ricaurte P. (eds). <cite class="title italic">Global Debates in the
                     Digital Humanities</cite>. University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis
                  (forthcoming).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="flanders2002">
                     <!-- close -->Flanders and Unsworth 2002</span> Flanders, J. and
                  Unsworth J. “The Evolution of Humanities Computing
                  Centers”, <cite class="title italic">Computers and the Humanities</cite>,
                  36 (2002): 379–380.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="foka2017">
                     <!-- close -->Foka et al. 2017</span> Foka, A., Misharina, A., Viktor,
                  A., Stefan, G. “Beyond Humanities qua Digital: Spatial and
                  Material Development for Digital Research Infrastructures in
                  HumlabX”, <cite class="title italic">Digital Scholarship in the
                     Humanities</cite>, 33(2) (2017): 264-78. <a href="https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqx008" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqx008'); return false" class="ref">https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqx008</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="fraistat2012">
                     <!-- close -->Fraistat 2012</span> Fraistat, N. “The Function of Digital Humanities Centers at the Present Time”. In
                  M. K. Gold (ed). <cite class="title italic">Debates in the Digital Humanities</cite>,
                  University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis (2012). <a href="http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/debates/text/23" onclick="window.open('http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/debates/text/23'); return false" class="ref">http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/debates/text/23</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="harrison1996">
                     <!-- close -->Harrison and                     Dourish 1996</span> Harrison, S. and Dourish P. “Re-Place-ing Space: The Roles
                  of Space and Place in Collaborative Systems”. Proceedings of the ACM
                  conference, Computer Supported Cooperative Work CSCW’96, Boston, MA. ACM Press,
                  New York (1996).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="hiatt2005">
                     <!-- close -->Hiatt 2005</span> Hiatt, G. “We Need
                  Humanities Labs”. <cite class="title italic">Inside Higher Ed</cite>,
                  October 26, 2005. <a href="https://www.insidehighered.com/views/2005/10/26/we-need-humanities-labs" onclick="window.open('https://www.insidehighered.com/views/2005/10/26/we-need-humanities-labs'); return false" class="ref">https://www.insidehighered.com/views/2005/10/26/we-need-humanities-labs</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="joselow2016">
                     <!-- close -->Joselow 2016</span> Joselow, M. “Labs Are for the Humanities, Too”. <cite class="title italic">Inside
                     Higher Ed</cite>, July 12, 2016. <a href="https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2016/07/12/conference-explores-humanities-labs" onclick="window.open('https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2016/07/12/conference-explores-humanities-labs'); return false" class="ref">https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2016/07/12/conference-explores-humanities-labs</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="kitch2017">
                     <!-- close -->Kitch 2017</span> Kitch, S. “The
                  Humanities Lab at ASU. A New Gateway to Humanities Research and
                  Pedagogy”. Sally L. Kitch (2017). <a href="http://sallykitch.net/humanities-lab" onclick="window.open('http://sallykitch.net/humanities-lab'); return false" class="ref">http://sallykitch.net/humanities-lab</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="klein2016">
                     <!-- close -->Klein and Gold                     2016</span> Klein L. F.
                  and Gold, M. K. “Digital Humanities: The Expanded Field.” In M. K. Gold and L.
                  F. Klein (eds). <cite class="title italic">Debates in the Digital Humanities</cite>.
                  University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis (2016). <a href="http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/debates/text/51" onclick="window.open('http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/debates/text/51'); return false" class="ref">http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/debates/text/51</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="lane2017">
                     <!-- close -->Lane 2017</span> Lane, R. <cite class="title italic">The Big
                     Humanities: Digital Humanities/Digital Laboratories</cite>. Routledge,
                  London and New York (2017).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="lefebvre1991">
                     <!-- close -->Lefebvre 1991</span> Lefebvre, H. <cite class="title italic">The Production of Space</cite>. Blackwell, Oxford and Cambridge, MA
                  (1991).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="pask2018">
                     <!-- close -->Pask 2018</span> Pask, K. “In the
                  Literature Lab”, <cite class="title italic">Modern Language
                     Quarterly</cite>, 79(1) (2018): 1-24. DOI: <a href="https://doi.org/10.1215/00267929-4264249" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.1215/00267929-4264249'); return false" class="ref">https://doi.org/10.1215/00267929-4264249</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="pawlicka2017">
                     <!-- close -->Pawlicka 2017</span>  Pawlicka, U. “Data, Collaboration, Laboratory: Bringing Concepts from Science into
                  Humanities Practice”, <cite class="title italic">English Studies</cite>,
                  98(5) (2017): 526-541. DOI: <a href="https://doi.org/10.1080/0013838X.2017.1332022" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.1080/0013838X.2017.1332022'); return false" class="ref">https://doi.org/10.1080/0013838X.2017.1332022</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="purdy2017">
                     <!-- close -->Purdy and                     DeVoss 2017</span> Purdy, J.
                  P. and DeVoss, D. N. <cite class="title italic">Making Space: Writing Instruction,
                     Infrastructure, and Multiliteracies</cite>. University of Michigan Press,
                  Ann Arbor (2017).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="relph1976">
                     <!-- close -->Relph 1976</span> Relph, E. <cite class="title italic">Place and
                     Placelessness</cite>. Pion, London (1976).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="saar2009">
                     <!-- close -->Saar and Palang 2009</span> Saar, M. and Palang, H. “The Dimensions of Place Meanings”, <cite class="title italic">Living Rev. Landscape Res.</cite>, 3 (2009). <a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.12942/lrlr-2009-3" onclick="window.open('http://dx.doi.org/10.12942/lrlr-2009-3'); return false" class="ref">http://dx.doi.org/10.12942/lrlr-2009-3</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="smithies2017">
                     <!-- close -->Smithies et al. 2017</span> Smithies, J. et al. “Mechanizing the Humanities? King’s Digital Lab as Critical
                  Experiment”, Digital Humanities 2017, DH2017, ADHO Conference in
                  Montreal, 10 August (2017). <a href="https://jamessmithies.org/blog/2017/08/17/mechanizing-humanities-kings-digital-lab-critical-experiment/" onclick="window.open('https://jamessmithies.org/blog/2017/08/17/mechanizing-humanities-kings-digital-lab-critical-experiment/'); return false" class="ref">https://jamessmithies.org/blog/2017/08/17/mechanizing-humanities-kings-digital-lab-critical-experiment/</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="soja1996">
                     <!-- close -->Soja 1996</span> Soja, E. W. <cite class="title italic">Thirdspace: Journeys to Los Angeles and Other Real-and-imagined
                     Places</cite>. Blackwell, Malden, MA (1996).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="svensson2015">
                     <!-- close -->Svensson                     2015</span> Svensson, P.
                  “The Humanistiscopes: Exploring the Situatedness of
                  Humanities Infrastructure.” In P. Svensson and D. T. Goldberg (eds).
                  <cite class="title italic">Between Humanities and the Digital</cite>, MA. MIT
                  Press, Cambridge and London (2015), pp. 337-354.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="svensson2010">
                     <!-- close -->Svensson 2010</span> Svensson, P. “The Landscape of Digital Humanities”, <cite class="title italic">Digital
                     Humanities Quarterly</cite>, 4(1) (2010). <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/4/1/000080/000080.html" onclick="window.open('http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/4/1/000080/000080.html'); return false" class="ref">http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/4/1/000080/000080.html</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="zorich2008">
                     <!-- close -->Zorich 2008</span> Zorich, D. <cite class="title italic">A
                     Survey of Digital Humanities Centers in the United States</cite>. Council
                  on Library and Information Resources, Washington (2008).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="centernet">
                     <!-- close -->centerNet n.d.</span> centerNet: An international network
                  of digital humanities centers. Centers. <a href="https://dhcenternet.org/centers" onclick="window.open('https://dhcenternet.org/centers'); return false" class="ref">https://dhcenternet.org/centers</a>.
               </div>
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar"><a href="#">Preview</a>  |  <span style="color: grey">XML</span> |  <a href="#" onclick="javascript:window.print();" title="Click for print friendly version">Print Article</a></div>
         </div>
      </div>
   </body>
</html>