<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
      <title>[PREVIEW] DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly: </title>
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_screen.css" media="screen" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_print.css" media="print" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" /><style type="text/css">
        #mainContent {
          float: none;
          padding-top: 2em;
          padding-left: 4em;
          padding-right: 4em;
          margin-left: 225px;
           
        }</style></head>
   <body>
      <div id="mainContent">
         <div xmlns:dhqBiblio="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/ns/biblio" class="DHQarticle">
            <div id="pubInfo">Preview<br />Volume 10 Number 1
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar">
               <form id="taporware" action="get">
                  <div><a href="/dhq/preview/index.html">Preview</a>
                      | 
                     <a rel="external" href="/dhq/vol/10/1/%0A                   000241%0A                .xml">XML</a>
                     
                     | 
                     		   Discuss
                     			(<a href="/dhq/vol/10/1/%0A                   000241%0A                /%0A                   000241%0A                .html#disqus_thread" data-disqus-identifier="&#xA;                   000241&#xA;                ">
                        				Comments
                        			</a>)
                     
                  </div>
               </form>
            </div>
            
            <div class="DHQheader">
               
               
               
               
               <h1 class="articleTitle">Introduction to the Digital Humanities
                  Summer Institute Colloquium Special Issue
               </h1>
               
               <div class="author"><span style="color: grey">James
                     O’Sullivan</span> &lt;<a href="mailto:josullivan_at_psu_dot_edu" onclick="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('josullivan_at_psu_dot_edu'); return false;" onkeypress="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('josullivan_at_psu_dot_edu'); return false;">josullivan_at_psu_dot_edu</a>&gt;, Pennsylvania State
                  University
               </div>
               
               <div class="author"><span style="color: grey">Mary
                     Galvin</span> &lt;<a href="mailto:galvin_dot_mg_at_gmail_dot_com" onclick="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('galvin_dot_mg_at_gmail_dot_com'); return false;" onkeypress="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('galvin_dot_mg_at_gmail_dot_com'); return false;">galvin_dot_mg_at_gmail_dot_com</a>&gt;, University College Cork
               </div>
               
               <div class="author"><span style="color: grey">Diane
                     Jakacki</span> &lt;<a href="mailto:diane_dot_jakacki_at_bucknell_dot_edu" onclick="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('diane_dot_jakacki_at_bucknell_dot_edu'); return false;" onkeypress="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('diane_dot_jakacki_at_bucknell_dot_edu'); return false;">diane_dot_jakacki_at_bucknell_dot_edu</a>&gt;, Bucknell University
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               <span class="Z3988" title="url_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;rft_val_fmt=info%3Aofi%2Ffmt%3Akev%3Amtx%3Ajournal&amp;rfr_id=info%3Asid%2Fzotero.org%3A2&amp;rft.genre=article&amp;rft.atitle=Introduction%20to%20the%20Digital%20Humanities%20Summer%20Institute%20Colloquium%20Special%20Issue&amp;rft.jtitle=Digital%20Humanities%20Quarterly&amp;rft.stitle=DHQ&amp;rft.issn=1938-4122&amp;rft.date=2016-02-03&amp;rft.volume=10&amp;rft.issue=1&amp;rft.aulast=O’Sullivan&amp;rft.aufirst=James&amp;rft.au=James%20O’Sullivan&amp;rft.au=Mary%20Galvin&amp;rft.au=Diane%20Jakacki"> </span></div>
            
            
            <div id="DHQtext">
               
               
               <div id="abstract">
                  <h2>Abstract</h2>
                  
                  
                  <p>This is the introduction to the DHSI Colloquium Special
                     Issue. The DHSI Colloquium serves as a forum for emerging
                     scholars to present their own research.This special issue
                     showcases some of the research presented at the Institute in 2014. 
                  </p>
                  
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               <div class="counter"><a href="#p1">1</a></div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p1">The DHSI Colloquium was founded in 2009 by Diane Jakacki and Cara
                  Leitch — then doctoral candidates at the University of Waterloo
                  and the University of Victoria, respectively — as the DHSI
                  Graduate Colloquium. As initially proposed to Ray Siemens, the
                  Colloquium would serve as a forum for emerging scholars to
                  present their own research. This was particularly valuable in
                  that moment, as research presented at major conferences tended
                  to focus on the work of more established scholars, with graduate
                  students rarely presenting in a capacity other than as research
                  assistants. While many generous and supportive principal
                  investigators and research supervisors encouraged emerging
                  scholars to take ownership of various components of major
                  research projects, there were not many outlets for presentation
                  of the specific student-driven activities. The DHSI Graduate
                  Student Colloquium offered these emerging scholars a platform to
                  present formal papers and to demonstrate works in progress to an
                  enthusiastic audience comprised of both established and emerging
                  DH practitioners, and most importantly, in an environment that
                  encouraged constructive feedback and professional guidance.
               </div>
               
               <div class="counter"><a href="#p2">2</a></div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p2">In 2012, after three successful years, Ray and the ad hoc
                  Colloquium Advisory Committee observed that there was an
                  unrealized opportunity to expand the pool of presenters to
                  include more scholars at different phases of their careers,
                  working across different registers. This coincided with a
                  remarkable growth in attendance at DHSI, and so the Colloquium,
                  as well as the audience, grew considerably. In order to
                  efficiently respond to the increasing volume of abstracts
                  submitted for consideration, as well as to accommodate more
                  presenters whose work was at different phases of development and
                  implementation, the structure of the Colloquium again changed,
                  with a variety of shorter formats introduced to accompany the
                  longer, more formal papers.
               </div>
               
               <div class="counter"><a href="#p3">3</a></div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p3">Two years later, in 2014, the Colloquium underwent further
                  transformation when James O’Sullivan and Mary Galvin succeeded
                  Diane as the event’s Chairs. Struck by the omnipresent sense of
                  community that exists at DHSI, James and Mary set about
                  continuing the work of their predecessors by maintaing the
                  Colloquium as a venue to present groundbreaking work, remaining
                  attractive to scholars as other DH conference, symposia, and
                  gatherings proliferate. The introduction of a poster session
                  proved hugely successful, a format designed to accommodate those
                  projects that are not conducive to the constraints of an oral
                  presentation set within a limited timeframe. A mechanism for
                  peer-review was incorporated: reviewers are instructed to offer
                  constructive criticisms, while the final program is developed in
                  an inclusive manner, with space found for any submission deemed
                  to be of an acceptable standard. It is testament to the support
                  of Ray, and of course, Daniel Sondheim, Assistant Director of
                  the Electronic Textual Cultures Lab at the University of
                  Victoria, that such a challenging scheduling process is
                  facilitated. 
               </div>
               
               <div class="counter"><a href="#p4">4</a></div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p4">We are in an era of firsts for the DHSI Colloquium: this special
                  issue marks the first ever publication to emerge from the
                  gathering; a dedicated website, <a class="ref" href="http://dhsicolloquium.org" onclick="window.open('http://dhsicolloquium.org'); return false">http://dhsicolloquium.org</a>, was launched, through
                  which proceedings are disseminated; the current CFP features
                  themed sessions, "Gender and the
                  Digital" and "Building an
                  Inclusive DH Community"; and 2016’s poster session will be
                  hosted in collaboration with the Electronic Literature
                  Organization. The next iteration will also benefit from the
                  addition of a local Program Assistant, Lindsey Seatter. But
                  while the Colloquium continues to expand and progress, its ethos
                  will remain consistent — it is an opporunity for digital
                  humanists, whether curious, fledgling, or established, to
                  present their research, projects, and ideas within an engaging,
                  collegial, and rewarding environment. The products of this
                  space — such as the varied, insightful, and rigorous research
                  articles found in this special issue — are sufficient
                  justification of this approach. 
               </div>
               
               <div class="counter"><a href="#p5">5</a></div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p5">DHSI is founded on collaborative principles — it is about learning
                  through sharing, encouraging curiosity, it is about the creation
                  of interpersonal and cross-instutional opportunities — all of
                  which underpin the model adopted by the Colloquium. While these
                  principles are its foundation, the presenters are very much the
                  driving force of the Colloquium, and it is this community that
                  will shape its future directions, so that it can continue to
                  serve as a platform for the many and diverse voices that make
                  our field what it is.
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
            </div>
            
            <div class="toolbar"><a href="#">Preview</a>  |  <span style="color: grey">XML</span> |  <a href="#" onclick="javascript:window.print();" title="Click for print friendly version">Print Article</a></div>
         </div>
      </div>
   </body>
</html>