<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
      <title>[PREVIEW] DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly: </title>
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_screen.css" media="screen" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_print.css" media="print" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" /><style type="text/css">
        #mainContent {
          float: none;
          padding-top: 2em;
          padding-left: 4em;
          padding-right: 4em;
          margin-left: 225px;
           
        }</style></head>
   <body>
      <div id="mainContent">
         <div class="DHQarticle">
            <div id="pubInfo">Preview<br />Volume 015 Number 1
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar">
               <form id="taporware" action="get">
                  <div><a href="//preview/index.html">Preview</a>
                      | 
                     <a rel="external" href="//vol/15/1/000543.xml">XML</a>
                     
                     | 
                     		   Discuss
                     			(<a href="/dhq/vol/15/1/000543/000543.html#disqus_thread" data-disqus-identifier="000543">
                        				Comments
                        			</a>)
                     
                  </div>
               </form>
            </div>
            
            
            
            <div class="DHQheader">
               
               
               
               <h1 class="articleTitle lang en">Book Review: Digital Sound Studies (2018) </h1>
               
               <div class="author"><span style="color: grey">Tracey El Hajj</span></div>
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               <span class="Z3988" title="url_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;rft_val_fmt=info%3Aofi%2Ffmt%3Akev%3Amtx%3Ajournal&amp;rfr_id=info%3Asid%2Fzotero.org%3A2&amp;rft.genre=article&amp;rft.atitle=Book%20Review%3A%20Digital%20Sound%20Studies%20(2018)&amp;rft.jtitle=Digital%20Humanities%20Quarterly&amp;rft.stitle=DHQ&amp;rft.issn=1938-4122&amp;rft.date=&amp;rft.volume=015&amp;rft.issue=1&amp;rft.aulast=El Hajj&amp;rft.aufirst=Tracey&amp;rft.au=Tracey%20El Hajj"> </span></div>
            
            
            
            
            <div id="DHQtext">
               
               
               
               <div id="abstract">
                  <h2>Abstract</h2>
                  
                  <p> The edited volume <cite class="title italic">Digital Sound Studies</cite> brings together
                     various voices addressing the potential of digital approaches to sound, practically
                     and
                     theoretically [<a class="ref" href="#lingold2018">Lingold et al. 2018</a>]. Contributors explore methodologies, platforms,
                     and initiatives that demonstrate interdisciplinary and inclusive work that centers
                     sound
                     and listening while demonstrating how such work can advance humanities scholarship.
                     The
                     contributions provide a balanced critique of DH as a norm and culture alongside detailing
                     digital sound studies' contributions to DH, the humanities, and the public. The volume
                     is
                     an excellent resource for those interested in digital sound studies.
                  </p>
                  
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p1">1</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p1"><cite class="title italic">Digital Sound Studies</cite>, edited by Mary Caton Lingold, Darren
                     Mueller, and Whitney Trettien and published by Duke University Press (2018), brings
                     together a variety of voices addressing the potential of digital approaches to sound,
                     practically and theoretically. While most contributors acknowledge the field's novelty,
                     they all agree on its timely interventions and the value of the interdisciplinary
                     work
                     this domain can provide. The field of digital sound studies not only investigates
                     new
                     methodologies but also contributes to — if not provokes — the field of digital humanities
                     (DH). In their introduction, the editors note that "[w]hile digital media [...] create
                     a
                     space of possibility for the study of sound, critical, interpretive labor fulfills
                     this
                     potential, not the technology itself" [<a class="ref" href="#lingold2018">Lingold et al. 2018</a>, 3]. This early
                     statement in the book echoes throughout the collection, particularly as authors discuss
                     their processes in the making and success of a particular project or sonic investigation.
                     The projects emphasize the labour that scholars invest and the initiative they take
                     to
                     advance sound studies and experiment with material, using a multitude of technologies
                     that
                     do not require advanced technical skills or expensive devices. In the afterward, Whitney
                     Trettien asks Jonathan Sterne about "the primary engine of change in the academy"
                     [<a class="ref" href="#lingold2018">Lingold et al. 2018</a>, 269]. It is not technology. Sterne argues that
                     institutions, money, and academic fashion drive academic change, as is the case for
                     DH. In
                     this edited volume, scholars demonstrate how individual initiative and labour play
                     a big
                     part in pushing scholarship in innovative directions. Intellectual and experimental
                     labour
                     are predominant in the chapters as the authors question DH's bias for text, all the
                     while
                     exploring pedagogical methods and research techniques that invite scholars — as well
                     as
                     the broader public — to invest in sound and listening as cultural approaches to the
                     humanities. <cite class="title italic">Digital Sound Studies</cite> demonstrates how sound and
                     listening can advance humanities scholarship, detailing pedagogical methodologies
                     that are
                     often critical of DH while addressing its gaps and proposing ways for sound studies
                     and DH
                     to be complementary.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p2">2</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p2">Contributors to <cite class="title italic">Digital Sound Studies</cite> mostly come from an
                     academic setting, and pedagogy emerges as a focus. Although not every chapter clearly
                     defines a pedagogical intervention or approach, most do gesture at the importance
                     of
                     digital sound studies in humanities classrooms. The three chapters in "Theories and
                     Genealogies" — by contributors Richard Cullen Rath, Myron M. Beasley, and Jonathan
                     W.
                     Stone — investigate sound and listening as performance, and highlight the importance
                     of
                     interdisciplinarity in their works. Richard Cullen Rath explores the importance of
                     introducing computers with sound cards to classrooms, and emphasizes how it "mak[es]
                     more
                     accessible the experiences of people who are not well represented in traditional
                     documentary sources" [<a class="ref" href="#lingold2018">Lingold et al. 2018</a>, 37]. In "The Pleasure (Is)
                     Principle," Aaron Trammell, Jennifer Lynn Stoever, and Liana Silva share their experience
                     as editors of the <cite class="title italic">Sounding Out!</cite> blog. Aside from their focus
                     on the processes and maintenance that go into the site, the authors explain how <cite class="title italic">Sounding Out!</cite> aims beyond academia. The team's work toward the
                     accessibility of sound studies is partly a pedagogical gesture. <cite class="title italic">Sounding Out!</cite>'s interdisciplinary content and multimodal format allow its
                     audience to access and hear multiple voices instead of a limited corpus of scholars
                     whose
                     work is already being broadly disseminated. Such an approach makes <cite class="title italic">Sounding Out!</cite> a go-to platform for academics who share an investment in social
                     justice and interdisciplinary conversations. Disseminating knowledge to the broader
                     public, beyond institutional boundaries and inequities, is another timely issue that
                     <cite class="title italic">Digital Sound Studies</cite> addresses.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p3">3</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p3">W. F. Umi Hsu also focuses on pedagogy in "Reprogramming Sounds of Learning," where
                     the
                     readers journey with the author's students as they work on their projects. The author
                     successfully "propose[s] a series of experimental approaches that attempt to reprogram
                     sounds back into learning and teaching" [<a class="ref" href="#lingold2018">Lingold et al. 2018</a>, 131]. The
                     chapter argues for the strong impact of sound on engaged learning, centralizing the
                     learning experience on "the experience of sounding and listening" [<a class="ref" href="#lingold2018">Lingold et al. 2018</a>, 134]. In that respect, Hsu explores three principles:
                     "remediation, reflexivity, and resonance" [<a class="ref" href="#lingold2018">Lingold et al. 2018</a>, 134]. These
                     principles align well with media studies and bring forth key aspects of multimodality
                     in
                     pedagogy. Hsu further highlights the role of reflexivity in bringing pedagogy outside
                     the
                     classroom: "Deconstructing the recipe of how digital sound media are made via an act
                     of
                     remaking can afford students [...] to gain an access to personal and reflexive meanings
                     of
                     technology in their everyday lives" [<a class="ref" href="#lingold2018">Lingold et al. 2018</a>, 139]. Hsu's
                     methodology entails having college students work with elementary school students to
                     fulfill their project requirements. This approach bridges academic work and everyday
                     life
                     through sound and listening, and fosters sonic curiosity and appreciation among elementary
                     students along with their college partners. As Michael J. Kramer argues, "[t]he digital
                     'remediation' of the image [...] provides an opportunity to open ears as well as eyes
                     more
                     fully to the echoes of the past" [<a class="ref" href="#lingold2018">Lingold et al. 2018</a>, 180]. Bringing together
                     the visual and sonic study of artifacts is another example of active sensorial encounters
                     with the material, proving as an effective means to engage a broad audience with diverse
                     interests.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p4">4</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p4">Beyond its contributions to pedagogy, <cite class="title italic">Digital Sound Studies</cite>
                     is an excellent resource for scholars looking to explore venues of accessible sound
                     projects and the technological turn in the humanities. In "Rhetorical Folkness:
                     Reanimating Walter J. Ong in the Pursuit of Digital Humanity," Jonathan W. Stone urges
                     that "[a]s we look toward the future of digital sound studies, [...] frameworks, from
                     secondary orality to digital humanity, usefully conceptualize the various ways
                     contemporary vernacular culture is embedded within, performed through, and transformed
                     by
                     digital technology" [<a class="ref" href="#lingold2018">Lingold et al. 2018</a>, 76]. In that sense, technological
                     accessibility promotes a broad reach for investigating humanities subjects through
                     sound,
                     beyond the limits of academic institutions. In "Becoming OutKasted," Bradley discusses
                     her
                     initiative "OutKasted Conversations," a webcast series published on YouTube. This
                     series
                     managed to "creat[e] a digital site for teasing out how hip-hop can serve as a catalyst
                     of
                     change in the post-civil rights American South" [<a class="ref" href="#lingold2018">Lingold et al. 2018</a>, 120].
                     The author highlights the work of the group, OutKast, as it addresses a variety of
                     issues,
                     "including race, gender, education, economics, spirituality vs. organized religion,
                     sexuality, and identity" [<a class="ref" href="#lingold2018">Lingold et al. 2018</a>, 122]. The series consists of
                     interviews that engage with the music in question, as it offers a critical framework
                     to
                     exploring issues — listed above — to "speak to a wider audience than exists inside
                     the
                     classroom or between the pages of an academic journal" [<a class="ref" href="#lingold2018">Lingold et al. 2018</a>, 127]. Similarly, the HiPSTAS institute is concerned with how new, accessible
                     methods of sound studies and their infrastructure affect scholarship. The project's
                     principal investigator, Tanya Clement, explores modes of tagging sound clips and the
                     politics and histories that standard classifications entail, examining the TEI
                     Transcription for Speech guidelines. Similarly, Joanna Swafford describes the process
                     of
                     creating <cite class="title italic">Augmented Notes</cite> and how the platform intends to
                     "build greater support for MEI (Music Encoding Initiative)" because "this additional
                     functionality would increase the tool's interoperability and usefulness" [<a class="ref" href="#lingold2018">Lingold et al. 2018</a>, 222]. The platforms and initiatives discussed in <cite class="title italic">Digital Sound Studies</cite> aim to increase accessibility and provide
                     more functionalities to sound studies scholars, all the while addressing the politics,
                     histories, and cultures inherent to the field. In that sense, contributors raise important
                     questions about DH in an attempt to provide ways for it and sound studies to work
                     together, or at least in parallel.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p5">5</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p5">Another common theme throughout <cite class="title italic">Digital Sound Studies</cite> is DH
                     and how — or whether — it can encompass sound studies. The main premise for such an
                     inclusion is the use of technology. While DH and digital sound studies involve the
                     use of
                     technology, platforms and initiatives in this book seem to be asking for inclusion
                     and
                     acknowledgment within DH. For instance, Trammell, Stoever, and Silva explain that
                     "[b]ecause many bloggers like [them] use a digital platform created by someone else,
                     the
                     question of whether blogging really constitutes 'making' — a key but contested tenet
                     of
                     digital humanities — is a roiling debate. Of course, as this essay argues, [they]
                     definitely think it does" [<a class="ref" href="#lingold2018">Lingold et al. 2018</a>, 84]. Although I agree that
                     making in DH has been the subject of various debates, projects like <cite class="title italic">Sounding Out!</cite> — which is well established in sound studies — do not need to be
                     acclaimed as DH projects to be scholarly interventions. Nevertheless, in calling for
                     acknowledgment by DH, contributors to <cite class="title italic">Digital Sound Studies</cite>
                     extend an invitation for DH to be more inclusive. For example, Steph Ceraso "proposes
                     several 'sound practices' that are intended to help scholars account for full embodied
                     kinds of sensory engagement; these practices amplify the ecological relationship between
                     sound, bodies, and environments" [<a class="ref" href="#lingold2018">Lingold et al. 2018</a>, 251]. Such approaches
                     promise a well-rounded undertaking of subject matter, beyond previously established
                     intellectual biases. Further, in their introduction, Lingold, Mueller, and Trettien
                     explain that scholars "worry that the [DH] field has a far too comfortable relationship
                     with systems of power that cultural criticism has long sought to challenge," adding
                     that
                     "the text-centricity of the field [is] a bias that is baked into its institutional
                     history" [<a class="ref" href="#lingold2018">Lingold et al. 2018</a>, 9]. As discussed in this review, contributors
                     to the book communicate the efforts needed for sound and listening to be more appreciated
                     as methodologies in the humanities. For instance, the platforms and initiatives described
                     in the book place great weight on having sound clips be part of scholarship.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p6">6</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p6"><cite class="title italic">Digital Sound Studies</cite> invites conversation around sound
                     studies and its relationships with neighboring fields, mostly DH. Contributors explore
                     methodologies, platforms, and initiatives that demonstrate interdisciplinary and inclusive
                     work that centers sound and listening. The chapters also provide examples of how sound
                     scholarship can reach a wider public than is accessible through academic journals.
                     Rebecca
                     Dowd Geoffroy-Schwinden argues that "[a] turn to diverse media in the presentation
                     of
                     audible history will encourage a vital rethinking of the performance of archival research
                     as well as scholarly production and reception" [<a class="ref" href="#lingold2018">Lingold et al. 2018</a>, 232].
                     This statement is yet another invitation for scholars to invest in the affordances
                     of
                     sound as a methodology towards advanced understandings of the humanities. As Sterne
                     asserts in his interview, "what we need are deep and multidimensional infrastructures"
                     [<a class="ref" href="#lingold2018">Lingold et al. 2018</a>, 282]. <cite class="title italic">Digital Sound
                        Studies</cite> provides models of how to create such infrastructures. While I believe
                     that this collection places more emphasis on DH than is necessary, the contributions
                     provide a balanced critique of DH as a norm and culture while detailing digital sound
                     studies' contributions to the humanities and the public. This edited volume is an
                     excellent resource for people interested in non-conventional experiences that defy
                     standard and mainstream methods of learning and teaching within the humanities. It
                     invites
                     critical thought from cultural, social, and artistic frameworks, with a sustained
                     and
                     sustainable focus on the potential of sound and listening.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
            </div>
            
            
            
            <div id="worksCited">
               <h2>Works Cited</h2>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="lingold2018">
                     <!-- close -->Lingold et al. 2018</span> Lingold, Mary Caton, Darren Muller,
                  and Whitney Trettien, eds. (2018). <cite class="title italic">Digital Sound Studies</cite>.
                  London: Duke University Press.
               </div>
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar"><a href="#">Preview</a>  |  <span style="color: grey">XML</span> |  <a href="#" onclick="javascript:window.print();" title="Click for print friendly version">Print Article</a></div>
         </div>
      </div>
   </body>
</html>