<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
      <title>[PREVIEW] DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly: </title>
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_screen.css" media="screen" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_print.css" media="print" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" /><style type="text/css">
        #mainContent {
          float: none;
          padding-top: 2em;
          padding-left: 4em;
          padding-right: 4em;
          margin-left: 225px;
           
        }</style></head>
   <body>
      <div id="mainContent">
         <div xmlns:dhqBiblio="http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/ns/biblio" class="DHQarticle">
            <div id="pubInfo">Preview<br />Volume 010 Number 3
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar">
               <form id="taporware" action="get">
                  <div><a href="//preview/index.html">Preview</a>
                      | 
                     <a rel="external" href="//vol/10/3/000261.xml">XML</a>
                     
                     | 
                     		   Discuss
                     			(<a href="/dhq/vol/10/3/000261/000261.html#disqus_thread" data-disqus-identifier="000261">
                        				Comments
                        			</a>)
                     
                  </div>
               </form>
            </div>
            
            <div class="DHQheader">
               
               
               
               
               <h1 class="articleTitle">Communicating Digital Humanities Across
                  and Beyond the Disciplines: From the "Public Communication
                  of DH" to its Interrelationship with Mainstream Humanities
               </h1>
               
               <div class="author"><span style="color: grey">Julianne Nyhan</span></div>
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               <span class="Z3988" title="url_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;rft_val_fmt=info%3Aofi%2Ffmt%3Akev%3Amtx%3Ajournal&amp;rfr_id=info%3Asid%2Fzotero.org%3A2&amp;rft.genre=article&amp;rft.atitle=Communicating%20Digital%20Humanities%20Across%20and%20Beyond%20the%20Disciplines%3A%20From%20the%20Public%20Communication%20of%20DH%20to%20its%20Interrelationship%20with%20Mainstream%20Humanities&amp;rft.jtitle=Digital%20Humanities%20Quarterly&amp;rft.stitle=DHQ&amp;rft.issn=1938-4122&amp;rft.date=&amp;rft.volume=010&amp;rft.issue=3&amp;rft.aulast=Nyhan&amp;rft.aufirst=Julianne&amp;rft.au=Julianne%20Nyhan"> </span></div>
            
            
            <div id="DHQtext">
               
               
               <div id="abstract">
                  <h2>Abstract</h2>
                  
                  
                  <p>This introductory article addresses
                     two facets of the communication of Digital Humanities (DH) and
                     how they have framed this special edition of <cite class="title italic">DHQ</cite>. I begin by
                     discussing a number of articles about Digital Humanities that
                     have relatively recently appeared in mainstream newspapers. I
                     then observe that a number of these articles not only show an
                     impoverished understanding of the field’s frame of reference but
                     also misrepresent various aspects of it, for example, its
                     interrelationship with the mainstream Humanities. Given that
                     many academic publications on the question "what is DH?"
                     have appeared in recent years, yet DH is, nonetheless,
                     misrepresented in this way, I propose that the field must look
                     again at the communication of its activities "in the
                     round." Now
                     that DH is arguably moving from the margins to the mainstream I
                     propose that the time has now come to address what we might call
                     the "Public Communication of DH" so that we can better
                     communicate to the general public and academics working in other
                     disciplines what it is that we do. I then turn to the overarching
                     aim of this special edition and the articles that are included
                     in it. Though written with a general audience in mind the
                     articles are not written in a "Public Communication of DH" mode
                     (because DH has not yet developed expertise in this area);
                     rather, they seek to make a contribution to the ongoing question
                     of the nature of the interrelationship that exists between DH
                     and the mainstream Humanities.
                  </p>
                  
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Introduction: DH in the Mainstream Media</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p1">1</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p1">Criticism of Digital Humanities (DH) is nothing new. This was
                     often alluded to by those who participated in the oral history
                     interviews that were carried out as part of the "Hidden
                     Histories of computing in the Humanities project, 1949-present"
                     [<a class="ref" href="#rockwell2012">Rockwell and Nyhan 2012</a>]. For example, Rockwell reflected on the
                     various types of opposition his work met with at an earlier
                     stage of his career. He recalled being asked: 
                     "Why are [you] running computing classes? This is like Pencils in
                     the Humanities." ... [I also heard] "you guys are intellectually
                     lightweight" [and encountered] "blatant sarcasm and ignorance."
                     [<a class="ref" href="#rockwell2012">Rockwell and Nyhan 2012</a>]
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p2">2</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p2">Indeed, numerous references to such criticism can be found in the
                     literature of the field. The newsletter of the <cite class="title italic">Association for Computers and the Humanities</cite> (ACH) is
                     particularly intriguing in this regard. For example, as Mary Dee
                     Harris (then President of ACH) wrote: 
                     
                     <blockquote>
                        <p> In 1970 I was accused of trying to "destroy literature" and now
                           the 1984 MLA Convention Program lists 10 meetings devoted to
                           Computer Assisted Instruction and Research... It is an
                           indication of the changing times...the profession has largely
                           accepted computers as a part of the discipline...even though not
                           everyone is involved in using computers, they are no longer
                           viewed as threatening [<a class="ref" href="#harris1984">Harris 1984</a>]. 
                        </p>
                     </blockquote>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p3">3</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p3">Hopeful as Harris was, it is clear that DH is once again viewed
                     as "threatening." This is evidenced by a flurry of essays and
                     opinion pieces that have appeared over the last few years in
                     publications with far greater reach than the typical academic
                     journal. Kirsch, writing in the <cite class="title italic">New
                        Republic,</cite> portrays DH as a disorganised and ineffectual
                     amalgam that is as unable to define itself as it is to convincingly
                     demonstrate that it can create new knowledge. Such ineptitude
                     notwithstanding, Kirsch goes on to argue that DH poses an
                     existential threat to Humanities. The revolutionary rhetoric
                     that often accompanies DH has an "undertone of menace, the
                     threat of historical illegitimacy and obsolescence" [<a class="ref" href="#kirsch2014">Kirsch 2014</a>]. So too he depicts the (implicitly) distinctive and
                     expansive modus operandi of DH — where building and tool-making
                     tend to be viewed on par with thinking and writing, and where
                     images can be used to communicate, critique or collaborate with
                     words — as chillingly unpropitious: 
                     "In this vision, the very idea of language as the basis of a
                     humane education — even of human identity — seems to give way to a
                     post- or pre-verbal discourse of pictures and objects. Digital
                     humanities becomes another name for the obsequies of humanism. [<a class="ref" href="#kirsch2014">Kirsch 2014</a>]" 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p4">4</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p4">The instrumentalist and results-orientated nature that is
                     supposed of DH is reiterated once more in the closing line as
                     Humanists are warned to guard against the decoy that is DH
                     because "[t]he danger is that they will wake up one morning to
                     find that they have sold their birth right for a mess of apps"
                      [<a class="ref" href="#kirsch2014">Kirsch 2014</a>]. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p5">5</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p5">The allegedly reductionist and anti-Humanities nature of DH is
                     described in articles in various other mainstream publications.
                     O’Connell, writing in the <cite class="title italic">The New Yorker</cite>, for
                     example, remarks: 
                     
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>As far as I could tell, there was a general skepticism about the
                           digital humanities, combined with a certain measure of
                           unease — arising, perhaps, from the vague aura of utility, even of
                           outright science, emanating from the discipline, and the sense
                           that this aura was attracting funding that might otherwise have
                           gone to more low-tech humanities projects. [<a class="ref" href="#oconnell2014">O'Connell 2014</a>]
                        </p>
                     </blockquote>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p6">6</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p6">Writing in <cite class="title italic">The Los Angeles Review of
                        Books</cite> in 2012, Marche positioned DH as
                     part of the creeping, and seemingly inexorable, computerisation
                     of all aspects of our lives, when he argued that "literature is
                     not data" [<a class="ref" href="#marche2012">Marche 2012</a>]. This is a thread that was again taken up in an
                     article in <cite class="title italic">The New York
                        Times</cite> that, ostensibly at least, positioned itself as
                     a supporter of DH. Chillingly, we here find that its promise is
                     characterised as "the transformation of the humanities into
                     science. By 'science' I mean using numbers to test hypotheses"
                      [<a class="ref" href="#leroi2015">Leroi 2015</a>]. Not only does the article reduce DH to a
                     discipline that is exclusively concerned with quantitative
                     methods but, in contrast with the Humanities, it is depicted as
                     one that deploys such methods in a completely neutral and
                     non-hermeneutic way:
                     
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>It’s easy to see how it will go. A traditional, analog, scholar
                           will make some claim about the origin, fate or significance of
                           some word, image, trope or theme in some Great Work. He’ll
                           support it with apt quotations, and fillet the canon for more of
                           the same. His evidence will be the sort that natural scientists
                           call "anecdotal" — but that won’t worry him since he’s not doing
                           science. ... But then a code-capable graduate student will
                           download the texts — not just the canon, but a thousand more —
                           run the algorithms, produce the graphs, estimate the p values,
                           and show the claim to be false, if false it indeed is. There
                           will be no rejoinder; the analog scholar won’t even know how to
                           read the results. Quantification has triumphed in field after
                           field of the natural and social sciences. It will here, too.
                           [<a class="ref" href="#leroi2015">Leroi 2015</a>]
                        </p>
                     </blockquote> 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p7">7</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p7">I could enumerate various other examples of such articles;
                     however, my point is, I hope, beginning to emerge. In the
                     mainstream media DH is frequently depicted as a threat to
                     mainstream Humanities and as an instrumentalist and
                     theoretically-naïve endeavour. Furthermore, it is also
                     frequently depicted in a way that few of those who work in DH
                     are likely to be able to relate to. This latter claim is
                     evidenced by the various blog posts. See, for example, <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#cordell2014">#cordell2014</a></span> and Twitter discussions that took place after the
                     publication of some of the articles discussed above. For
                     example, in response to [<a class="ref" href="#leroi2015">Leroi 2015</a>], Barker
                     tweeted "This
                     article would be better entitled 'misunderstanding the digital
                     humanities'" (Feb 18). 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p8">8</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p8">In the main, the replies from within the DH community have tended
                     to focus on the respective articles’ shortcomings. For example,
                     Schnapp et al’s response to Kirsch emphasizes the logical flaws,
                     oversights and factual errors that the article contains. They
                     argue, for example, that he has an impoverished understanding of
                     the scholarship of the history of the book, that he accords New
                     Criticism a vim that has long departed it and they briefly touch
                     on his misrepresentation of the aims and practices of DH
                     [<a class="ref" href="#schnapp2014">Schnapp 2014</a>]. Such responses are important and
                     necessary. However, they do not go far enough or recognize the
                     more fundamental issue that I believe to be at stake, namely the
                     discipline’s current shortcomings in the context of what we
                     might think of as the "public communication of DH" and the
                     necessity of approaching this in a more systematic and expert
                     way, as I will now argue. 
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Reflecting on Popular Depictions of DH</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p9">9</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p9">By my lights, the most telling aspects of the articles discussed
                     above are that they (i) do not accurately describe the aims or
                     scholarship of DH (ii) are written by people who are not experts
                     in DH and (iii) appear in mainstream media with large
                     readerships. That the first point should be true is immensely
                     puzzling when one considers the very many contributions that
                     have been written on the topic "What is DH?" (see, for example,
                     [<a class="ref" href="#terras2013">Terras, Nyhan, and Vanhoutte 2013</a>] and less formal explorations such as
                     the "Day
                     of Digital Humanities," [<a class="ref" href="#rockwell2012">Rockwell and Nyhan 2012</a>]. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p10">10</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p10">Of course, one might counter that authors such as Kirsch are
                     referencing wider discourses about neoliberalisation and, far
                     from misunderstanding DH, they are intentionally misrepresenting
                     it as a handmaiden of those who seek to commercialise higher
                     education. I’ll return to this point later. For now I want to
                     counter that riposte by recalling the many references one can
                     find (for example, "As such, digital humanities is the
                     consummate academic hot-button topic: Everyone has vehement
                     opinions, but few actually know what they’re talking about"
                     [<a class="ref" href="#schuman2014">Schuman 2014</a>]) about how poorly DH is understood outside of
                     expert circles. For me, a sense of cognitive dissonance is
                     created by, one the one side, the wealth of literature that
                     exists on the topic "What is DH?" and, on the other side, the
                     limited understanding of answers to that question that
                     characterises the articles discussed above (and that appears to
                     exist outside of the field more generally). For the most part DH
                     has not, so far, managed to communicate its values and aims in a
                     way that can easily be understood by many scholars from other
                     disciplines, journalists, non-fiction writers and the general
                     public. Furthermore, I believe that DH has not managed to
                     adequately communicate (if alone in the sense that this is a
                     much discussed question within the field) the complex nature of
                     its interrelationship with the mainstream Humanities to this
                     wider audience. In pointing this out my aim is not to criticise
                     extant "What is DH literature?" on the grounds that it has not
                     managed to communicate its message to wider audiences: on the
                     whole, academic literature does not tend to be written for
                     non-specialist audiences. Rather, my aim is to point out that
                     the increasing institutionalisation and professionalization of
                     DH requires us to think about and plan for our discipline in
                     ways that have not really been necessary up to now. Furthermore,
                     I believe that criticism such as that contained in the media
                     articles discussed above is potentially very valuable because it
                     alerts us to the ways that DH is being (mis)understood by those
                     who do not work in the field and it alerts us to the necessity
                     of responding in a more systematic way than we have up to now.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">On the Public Communication of DH</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p11">11</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p11">McCarty’s Busa lecture [<a class="ref" href="#mccarty2014">McCarty 2014</a>] evoked the virtues of
                     periodically looking up from the day-to-day research that so
                     thoroughly absorbs and enthralls us in order to ponder the
                     longer-term research agenda of DH. He correctly emphasized the
                     crucial role that knowledge of the history of the field can play
                     in planning the future of the field: "Digital humanities needs
                     use its 64 years of fumbling to gain leverage for a great
                     inductive leap to a vantage point from which its disciplinary
                     shape and trajectory...can be clearly seen. The key to its
                     future — and in some measure the future of all the related
                     humanities — is its history" [<a class="ref" href="#mccarty2014">McCarty 2014</a>, 13]. To his ruminations on the
                     research trajectory of the field I wish to add a proposal in the
                     context of what might be seen as the strategy and foresight of
                     the field, namely the necessity of appointing chairs in the
                     "Public Communication of DH." Perhaps pipeline issues will make
                     the appointment of chairs difficult in the short term. Yet, at
                     the very least, I believe that our scholarly associations should
                     support initiatives that could foster the development of such
                     expertise in the longer term while advocating to those who
                     control the purse strings about the importance of such
                     appointments. I believe that this is necessary not only because
                     DH is becomingly increasingly institutionalised (see, for
                     example, <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#jockers2013">#jockers2013</a></span>) but also because my observations
                     (ii) and (iii) above indicate that the market in the mainstream
                     media that clearly exists for such information is, at the
                     present time, dominated by those who are neither experts in DH
                     nor adequately understand it. The current situation seems to me
                     rather similar to one description of the motivations that lay
                     behind activities in the area of the public communication of
                     science in the 1970s: "[it] involved broader groups within the
                     scientific communities and reflected, at least in part, a
                     concern that the good (p.2) news was not being heard – even that
                     the respect and reputation of science needed to be
                     salvaged." [<a class="ref" href="#bucchi2008">Bucchi, Massimiano, and Trench 2008</a>, 1–2]
                     Indeed, it is in the context of Science and Technology that
                     endeavours in the "Public Communication of Science" are most
                     established, and so I will now survey representative literature
                     in order to provide further context about my proposal. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p12">12</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p12">An awareness of the necessity of communicating to the general
                     public about science, and advocating for its benefits (and,
                     sometimes, limitations), preceded the professionalization of
                     science in the mid-19<span class="hi superscript">th</span> century [<a class="ref" href="#bucchi2008">Bucchi, Massimiano, and Trench 2008</a>, 1]. Battifoglia, for example, has
                     reconstructed "the history of science popularisation through
                     analysis of popular science magazines published in Italy from
                     1788 to 2002" <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#battifoglia2004">#battifoglia2004</a></span>. Various specialised bodies and
                     associations that addressed the furthering of science were
                     founded in the 19<span class="hi superscript">th</span> century [<a class="ref" href="#bucchi2008">Bucchi, Massimiano, and Trench 2008</a>, 1]. For example, in 1848 the American Association
                     for the Advancement of Science, an "an international non-profit
                     organization dedicated to advancing science for the benefit of
                     all people" <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#aas">#aas</a></span> was founded. The issue as to whether
                     Science Communication is a separate and fully fledged field or a
                     subdiscipline of fields such as the Sociology of Science,
                     Science and Technology Studies or Media Studies etc., remains
                     contentious. In any case, structures that are often taken as
                     hallmarks of disciplinarity (dedicated peer reviewed
                     conferences, journals and scholarly associations) have existed
                     since the 1970s <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#gascoigne2010">#gascoigne2010</a></span>. The following is a
                     useful overview of the field’s frame of reference: 
                     
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>Science communicators think of the media as another form of
                           discourse...science communication deals with the diffusion,
                           propagation and appropriation of scientific knowledge in
                           different context, for different purpose, with different effects
                           (intended or unintended), and the paradigms employed qualify
                           these processes. Most of the time we deal with non-formal
                           knowledge of scientific knowledge, which could be (depending on
                           the theoretical frame of reference we use) representations,
                           misinterpretations, misconceptions, preconceptions, everyday
                           knowledge, or common sense knowledge. <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#gascoigne2010">#gascoigne2010</a></span></p>
                     </blockquote> 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p13">13</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p13">Furthermore, it also tends to have a political and activist
                     dimension: "In the years before, during and after World War II,
                     a generation of scientists with twin commitments to political
                     activism and science sought to explain contemporary science and
                     its benefits to the 'common man.'" [<a class="ref" href="#bucchi2008">Bucchi, Massimiano, and Trench 2008</a>, 1]
                     Aside from affinities with DH in terms of the latter’s emerging
                     political and activist dimensions (see, for example, <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#losh2012">#losh2012</a></span>),
                     this is also relevant in the context of the mainstream portrayal
                     of DH mentioned above. As I wrote, one might argue that Kirsch
                     (and others) wilfully misrepresent DH for political end. Even if
                     this were true, I don’t believe that it would undermine the
                     necessity of addressing the public communication of DH. Rather,
                     it draws attention to how narratives about "science" (in the sense
                     of <em class="emph">wissenschaft</em>) can serve political (and
                     other) agendas, and the public should be as aware of this in
                     knowledge dissemination contexts as they are in terms of
                     commercial advertising. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p14">14</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p14">This editorial is not the place to address particulars about the
                     institutional embedding of proposed chairs in the Public
                     Communication of DH; however, a closer look at some high profile
                     appointments such as the Simonyi Professorship for the Public
                     Understanding of Science in Oxford University in the UK
                     emphasise the many promising points of departure that already
                     exist. Firstly, as I have assumed in the above, such a post
                     could aim to communicate with not only with the general public but
                     also with scholars in other academic disciplines. That this
                     should ideally be an aspect of the Simonyi Chair is made clear
                     in the manifesto written at the time it was set up: 
                     
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>[the aim of the post is to] make important contributions to the
                           public understanding of some scientific field rather than study
                           the public’s perception of the same. By "public" we mean the
                           largest possible audience, provided, however, that people who
                           have the power and ability to propagate or oppose the ideas
                           (especially scholars in other sciences and in humanities,
                           engineers, journalists, politicians, professionals, and artists)
                           are not lost in the process. <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#simonyi1995">#simonyi1995</a></span></p>
                     </blockquote>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p15">15</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p15">The manifesto also explains that such a post is necessary due to
                     the centrality of symbolic expression to the sciences: 
                     
                     <blockquote>
                        <p>Symbolic expression enables the highest degree of abstraction and
                           thence the utilization of powerful mathematical and data
                           processing tools ensure tremendous progress. At the same time
                           the very means of success tends to isolate the scientists from
                           the lay audience and prevents the communication of the results.
                           Considering the profoundly vital interdependence between the
                           society at large and the scientific world, the dearth of
                           effective information flow is positively dangerous. <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#simonyi1995">#simonyi1995</a></span></p>
                     </blockquote>
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p16">16</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p16">Again, here parallels with DH can be noticed not only due to the
                     role that computation, and thus symbolic manipulation, plays in
                     our discipline but also in the way that some Digital Humanities
                     research results have entered or are entering into the mainstream. The
                     most obvious and widely known example of this is the impact that
                     TEI (Text Encoding Initiative) had on the language that would become the lingua franca
                     of data
                     exchange, XML.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p17">17</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p17">It is also notable that in recent times various posts in what
                     might be called the "Public Communication of
                     the Humanities"
                     have been appointed. Following on from the successful Being
                     Human festival, which aimed to "show people the best of what we
                     do through a festival of the humanities in which researchers can
                     showcase the latest research, making it accessible to a wider
                     audience and showing that it is relevant to people’s lives"
                      <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#smith2014">#smith2014</a></span>, the University of London’s School of Advanced
                     Study’s (SAS) has appointed its first chair in public
                     understanding of the humanities, Professor Sarah Churchwell
                     (Anon 2015). The University of Sheffield has also appointed
                     Professor Angie Hobbs as Professor of the public understanding
                     of Philosophy (Anon 2012). While DH has placed itself in the
                     position for advocating for the Humanities through groups such
                     as 4Humanities, it has not addressed in any meaningful way the
                     necessity of communicating what it does to a larger and
                     non-specialist public. Therefore, I have used part of this
                     editorial to make what I hope to have shown is both a convincing
                     and urgent case for such a development. In the next part of this
                     editorial I will explain the rationale of the special edition
                     that is presented here and give an overview of the contributions
                     that are contained in it. 
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Digital Humanities and the Mainstream Humanities</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p18">18</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p18">In this special issue we have taken up one of the points
                     emphasised, namely, the nature of the interrelationship that
                     exists between the Humanities and DH. We have mentioned how this
                     relationship has, I believe, been misconstrued in the
                     non-professional literature of the field. Within the
                     professional literature it is also much discussed: it has
                     variously, and with varying levels of plausibility, been argued
                     that DH will replace, extend, revolutionize, redeem, save or
                     even destroy the Humanities. This special issue will
                     seek to examine this relationship from a different perspective,
                     namely how and whether DH intersects with one of the most
                     central concerns of many disciplines of the Humanities:
                     problematization. In short, the issue aims to explore not
                     whether DH is solving Humanities’ problems; instead it asks how DH is making
                     such problems more difficult, more problematic, more indicative
                     of the Human condition. Though the articles contained in this
                     issue have been written with a broader audience in mind, it is to
                     the professional literature of the field that they seek to make
                     a contribution. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p19">19</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p19">As text is central to the Humanities the focus of this issue is
                     also text; however, in light of how digitization remediates all
                     analog sources into a common binary format the notion of text is
                     here broadly conceived to comprise any source that contains even
                     a single word or graph, whether text-based art, audio-visual
                     materials such as oral history recordings, software and computer
                     programs, visualizations, musical scores etc. It is hoped that
                     this special issue will not only contribute to current
                     understandings of digital text but also that it will shed new
                     light on the relationship between the Humanities and DH in terms
                     of their shared and differing ways of thinking and questioning.
                     In essence, our aim was to explore, or even simply identify, new
                     routes or neglected routes for Humanities and DH scholars to
                     traverse. This theme occurs, to varying degrees, in all the
                     articles selected for inclusion in the issue. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p20">20</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p20">Niels Brüegger’s comparison of digitised collections and web archives
                     gives an overview of the fascinating and emerging area of web
                     archives while aiming to understand how different "types of
                     digital material affect different phases of scholarly work."
                     Tanya Clement argues that DH scholars "have made a tradition of
                     problematizing our understanding of textuality within the
                     context of designing information systems for texts that, in many
                     cases, still look like books." She extends this frame of
                     reference by proposing a rationale of audio text and describing
                     a prototype tool for analysing audio collections. Claire Clivaz
                     draws on the history of the book and philosophers like Derrida
                     to argue that the demise of covers and bindings is not a
                     phenomenon that is unique to the digital age; nevertheless, she
                     calls for DH to "dare to depart from
                     ancient bindings and create new boundaries." Arianna Ciula and
                     Cristina  Marras focus on a central activity of DH, namely modelling, and set out
                     an
                     exploratory framework (pragmatic modelling) for such
                     practices and then draw on the framework to show how "DH modelling practices
                     challenge epistemological and linguistic restrictions, by, for
                     example, problematising the adoption of terminology belonging to
                     the domain of computer sciences." Stuart Dunn and Mareike
                     Katharina Höckendorff "combine
                     perspectives from historical research and literary criticism to
                     problematize the categorization, computation and representation
                     of events in cultural heritage." Finally, Stan Ruecker contrasts the
                     successes that the sciences have made in "capturing the public
                     imagination" with the situation in the Humanities where cultural
                     and heritage institutions have tended to "provide opportunities
                     for passively consuming cultural production, rather than with
                     the core interest of the Humanities, which is in enriching
                     objects of study by analyzing them through a variety of
                     theoretical lenses." In addition to arguing that the Humanities
                     must learn from the Sciences in this regard he argues that DH
                     has a crucial role to play as "the driving force behind this
                     education."
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Conclusion</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p21">21</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p21">This article has addressed two facets of the communication of
                     Digital Humanities (DH) and how they have framed this special
                     edition of <cite class="title italic">DHQ</cite>. Firstly, I argued that the time has now come to
                     address what we might call the "Public Communication of DH" so
                     that we can better communicate to the general public and
                     academics working in other disciplines what it is that we do.
                     Secondly, I turned to overarching aim of this special edition
                     and the articles that are included in it. Though written with a
                     general audience in mind the articles are not written in a
                     "Public Communication of DH" mode (because DH has not yet
                     developed expertise in this area); rather, they seek to make a
                     contribution to the ongoing question of the nature of the
                     interrelationship that exists between DH and the mainstream
                     Humanities. 
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
               
            </div>
            
            <div id="worksCited">
               <h2>Works Cited</h2>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="barker2014">
                     <!-- close -->Barker 2014</span> Barker, Elton
                  (@eltonteb). Feb 18 2014. "This article would be
                  better entitled 'misunderstanding the digital
                  humanities'
                  nytimes.com/2015/02/14/opi… via @jessogden @silviOLOrusso."
                  Tweet.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="bucchi2008">
                     <!-- close -->Bucchi, Massimiano, and Trench 2008</span> Bucchi, Massimiano, and Brian Trench. 2008.
                  <cite class="title italic">Handbook of Public Communication of Science and
                     Technology</cite>. Routledge.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="harris1984">
                     <!-- close -->Harris 1984</span> Harris, M.D., 1984.
                  "Observations on computers and
                  poetry." <cite class="title italic">ACH Newletter</cite>, 6(4).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="hitchcock2013">
                     <!-- close -->Hitchcock 2013</span> Hitchcock, T.,
                  2013. "Historyonics: Hearing the Dead - Ten years
                  of the Old Bailey Online." <cite class="title italic">Historyonics</cite>.
                  Available at:
                  <a class="ref" href="http://historyonics.blogspot.co.uk/2013/04/hearing-dead-ten-years-of-old-bailey.html" onclick="window.open('http://historyonics.blogspot.co.uk/2013/04/hearing-dead-ten-years-of-old-bailey.html'); return false">http://historyonics.blogspot.co.uk/2013/04/hearing-dead-ten-years-of-old-bailey.html</a>
                  [Accessed March 10, 2015].
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="kirsch2014">
                     <!-- close -->Kirsch 2014</span> Kirsch, A., 2014.
                  "Technology Is Taking Over English Departments."
                  <cite class="title italic">The New Republic</cite>. Available at:
                  <a class="ref" href="http://www.newrepublic.com/article/117428/limits-digital-humanities-adam-kirsch" onclick="window.open('http://www.newrepublic.com/article/117428/limits-digital-humanities-adam-kirsch'); return false">http://www.newrepublic.com/article/117428/limits-digital-humanities-adam-kirsch</a>
                  [Accessed March 6, 2015].
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="leroi2015">
                     <!-- close -->Leroi 2015</span> Leroi, A.M., 2015.
                  "Digitizing the Humanities." <cite class="title italic">The New York Times</cite>. Available at:
                  <a class="ref" href="http://www.nytimes.com/2015/02/14/opinion/digitizing-the-humanities.html" onclick="window.open('http://www.nytimes.com/2015/02/14/opinion/digitizing-the-humanities.html'); return false">http://www.nytimes.com/2015/02/14/opinion/digitizing-the-humanities.html</a>
                  [Accessed March 6, 2015].
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="marche2012">
                     <!-- close -->Marche 2012</span> Marche, S., 2012.
                  "Literature is not Data: Against Digital
                  Humanities." <cite class="title italic">Los Angeles Review of
                     Books</cite>. Available at:
                  <a class="ref" href="http://lareviewofbooks.org/essay/literature-is-not-data-against-digital-humanities/" onclick="window.open('http://lareviewofbooks.org/essay/literature-is-not-data-against-digital-humanities/'); return false">http://lareviewofbooks.org/essay/literature-is-not-data-against-digital-humanities/</a>
                  [Accessed February 9, 2014].
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="mccarty2014">
                     <!-- close -->McCarty 2014</span> McCarty, W. "Getting
                  there from here. Remembering the future of digital
                  humanities."<cite class="title italic">Roberto Busa Award Lecture
                     2013</cite>. <cite class="title italic">Literary &amp; Linguistic Computing</cite> (2014)
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="oconnell2014">
                     <!-- close -->O'Connell 2014</span> O’Connell, M.,
                  2014. "Bright Lights, Big Data."
                  <cite class="title italic">The New Yorker Blogs</cite>. Available at:
                  <a class="ref" href="http://www.newyorker.com/online/blogs/books/2014/03/bright-lights-big-data.html" onclick="window.open('http://www.newyorker.com/online/blogs/books/2014/03/bright-lights-big-data.html'); return false">http://www.newyorker.com/online/blogs/books/2014/03/bright-lights-big-data.html</a>
                  [Accessed March 29, 2014].
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="rockwell2012">
                     <!-- close -->Rockwell and Nyhan 2012</span> Rockwell, G. et
                  al., 2012. "Trading Stories: an Oral History
                  Conversation between Geoffrey Rockwell and Julianne Nyhan."
                  6(3). Available at:
                  <a class="ref" href="http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/6/3/000135/000135.html" onclick="window.open('http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/6/3/000135/000135.html'); return false">http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/6/3/000135/000135.html</a>
                  [Accessed March 10, 2015].
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="schnapp2014">
                     <!-- close -->Schnapp 2014</span> Schnapp, J. et al.,
                  2014. "The Immense Promise of the Digital
                  Humanities." <cite class="title italic">The New Republic</cite>. Available
                  at:
                  <a class="ref" href="http://www.newrepublic.com/article/117711/digital-humanities-have-immense-promise-response-adam-kirsh" onclick="window.open('http://www.newrepublic.com/article/117711/digital-humanities-have-immense-promise-response-adam-kirsh'); return false">http://www.newrepublic.com/article/117711/digital-humanities-have-immense-promise-response-adam-kirsh</a>
                  [Accessed March 8, 2015].
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="schuman2014">
                     <!-- close -->Schuman 2014</span> Schuman, R., 2014.
                  "Will Digital Humanities #Disrupt the
                  University?" <cite class="title italic">Slate</cite>. Available at:
                  <a class="ref" href="http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/future_tense/2014/04/digital_humanities_and_the_future_of_technology_in_higher_ed.html" onclick="window.open('http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/future_tense/2014/04/digital_humanities_and_the_future_of_technology_in_higher_ed.html'); return false">http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/future_tense/2014/04/digital_humanities_and_the_future_of_technology_in_higher_ed.html</a>
                  [Accessed March 9, 2015].
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="straumsheim2014">
                     <!-- close -->Straumsheim 2014</span> Straumsheim,
                  C., 2014. "Digital humanities
                  bubble." <cite class="title italic">Inside Higher Ed</cite>. Available at:
                  <a class="ref" href=" https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2014/05/08/digital-humanities-wont-save-humanities-digital-humanists-say#sthash.8ixV4wNi.dpbs" onclick="window.open(' https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2014/05/08/digital-humanities-wont-save-humanities-digital-humanists-say#sthash.8ixV4wNi.dpbs'); return false">https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2014/05/08/digital-humanities-wont-save-humanities-digital-humanists-say#sthash.8ixV4wNi.dpbs</a>
                  [Accessed March 8, 2015].
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="terras2013">
                     <!-- close -->Terras, Nyhan, and Vanhoutte 2013</span> Terras, M.M., Nyhan, J. &amp; Vanhoutte, E.
                  eds., 2013. <cite class="title italic">Defining digital humanities: a reader</cite>,
                  Farnham, Surrey, England : Burlington, VT: Ashgate Publishing
                  Limited ; Ashgate Publishing Company.
               </div>
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar"><a href="#">Preview</a>  |  <span style="color: grey">XML</span> |  <a href="#" onclick="javascript:window.print();" title="Click for print friendly version">Print Article</a></div>
         </div>
      </div>
   </body>
</html>