<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
      <title>[PREVIEW] DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly: </title>
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_screen.css" media="screen" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />
      <link href="../../common/css/dhq_print.css" media="print" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" /><style type="text/css">
        #mainContent {
          float: none;
          padding-top: 2em;
          padding-left: 4em;
          padding-right: 4em;
          margin-left: 225px;
           
        }</style></head>
   <body>
      <div id="mainContent">
         <div class="DHQarticle">
            <div id="pubInfo">Preview<br />Volume 014 Number 4
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar">
               <form id="taporware" action="get">
                  <div><a href="//preview/index.html">Preview</a>
                      | 
                     <a rel="external" href="//vol/14/4/000490.xml">XML</a>
                     
                     | 
                     		   Discuss
                     			(<a href="/dhq/vol/14/4/000490/000490.html#disqus_thread" data-disqus-identifier="000490">
                        				Comments
                        			</a>)
                     
                  </div>
               </form>
            </div>
            
            <div class="DHQheader">
               
               
               
               
               <h1 class="articleTitle lang en">Developing Geographically Oriented NLP Approaches to
                  Sixteenth–Century Historical Documents: Digging into Early Colonial Mexico
               </h1>
               
               
               <div class="author"><span style="color: grey">Diego Jiménez–Badillo
                     </span> &lt;<a href="mailto:diego_jimenez_at_inah_dot_gob_dot_mx" onclick="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('diego_jimenez_at_inah_dot_gob_dot_mx'); return false;" onkeypress="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('diego_jimenez_at_inah_dot_gob_dot_mx'); return false;">diego_jimenez_at_inah_dot_gob_dot_mx</a>&gt;, Museo del Templo Mayor, Instituto Nacional de Antropología e
                  Historia
               </div>
               
               <div class="author"><span style="color: grey">Patricia Murrieta–Flores
                     </span> &lt;<a href="mailto:p_dot_a_dot_murrieta-flores_at_lancaster_dot_ac_dot_uk" onclick="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('p_dot_a_dot_murrieta-flores_at_lancaster_dot_ac_dot_uk'); return false;" onkeypress="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('p_dot_a_dot_murrieta-flores_at_lancaster_dot_ac_dot_uk'); return false;">p_dot_a_dot_murrieta-flores_at_lancaster_dot_ac_dot_uk</a>&gt;, Digital Humanities Hub–History Department, Lancaster
                  University
               </div>
               
               <div class="author"><span style="color: grey">Bruno Martins
                     </span> &lt;<a href="mailto:bruno_dot_g_dot_martins_at_tecnico_dot_ulisboa_dot_pt" onclick="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('bruno_dot_g_dot_martins_at_tecnico_dot_ulisboa_dot_pt'); return false;" onkeypress="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('bruno_dot_g_dot_martins_at_tecnico_dot_ulisboa_dot_pt'); return false;">bruno_dot_g_dot_martins_at_tecnico_dot_ulisboa_dot_pt</a>&gt;, The Instituto de Engenharia de Sistemas e Computadores, Investigação
                  e Desenvolvimento em Lisboa, INESC–ID, University of Lisbon
               </div>
               
               <div class="author"><span style="color: grey">Ian Gregory
                     </span> &lt;<a href="mailto:i_dot_gregory_at_lancaster_dot_ac_dot_uk" onclick="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('i_dot_gregory_at_lancaster_dot_ac_dot_uk'); return false;" onkeypress="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('i_dot_gregory_at_lancaster_dot_ac_dot_uk'); return false;">i_dot_gregory_at_lancaster_dot_ac_dot_uk</a>&gt;, Digital Humanities Hub–History Department, Lancaster
                  University
               </div>
               
               <div class="author"><span style="color: grey">Mariana Favila-Vázquez
                     </span> &lt;<a href="mailto:mariana_dot_favila_at_gmail_dot_com" onclick="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('mariana_dot_favila_at_gmail_dot_com'); return false;" onkeypress="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('mariana_dot_favila_at_gmail_dot_com'); return false;">mariana_dot_favila_at_gmail_dot_com</a>&gt;, Museo del Templo Mayor, Instituto Nacional de Antropología e
                  Historia
               </div>
               
               <div class="author"><span style="color: grey">Raquel oLiceras-Garrido
                     </span> &lt;<a href="mailto:r_dot_liceras_at_lancaster_dot_ac_dot_uk" onclick="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('r_dot_liceras_at_lancaster_dot_ac_dot_uk'); return false;" onkeypress="javascript:window.location.href='mailto:'+deobfuscate('r_dot_liceras_at_lancaster_dot_ac_dot_uk'); return false;">r_dot_liceras_at_lancaster_dot_ac_dot_uk</a>&gt;, Digital Humanities Hub–History Department, Lancaster
                  University
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
               
               
               <span class="Z3988" title="url_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;rft_val_fmt=info%3Aofi%2Ffmt%3Akev%3Amtx%3Ajournal&amp;rfr_id=info%3Asid%2Fzotero.org%3A2&amp;rft.genre=article&amp;rft.atitle=Developing%20Geographically%20Oriented%20NLP%20Approaches%20to%20Sixteenth–Century%20Historical%20Documents%3A%20Digging%20into%20Early%20Colonial%20Mexico&amp;rft.jtitle=Digital%20Humanities%20Quarterly&amp;rft.stitle=DHQ&amp;rft.issn=1938-4122&amp;rft.date=&amp;rft.volume=014&amp;rft.issue=4&amp;rft.aulast=Jiménez–Badillo&amp;rft.aufirst=Diego&amp;rft.au=Diego%20Jiménez–Badillo&amp;rft.au=Patricia%20Murrieta–Flores&amp;rft.au=Bruno%20Martins&amp;rft.au=Ian%20Gregory&amp;rft.au=Mariana%20Favila-Vázquez&amp;rft.au=Raquel o%20Liceras-Garrido"> </span></div>
            
            
            <div id="DHQtext">
               
               
               <div id="abstract">
                  <h2>Abstract</h2>
                  
                  
                  <p>This article introduces an ongoing Digital Humanities project aimed at leveraging
                     the
                     benefits of Natural Language Processing, Corpus Linguistics, Machine Learning, and
                     Spatial Analysis for advancing the computational analysis of vast historical corpora.
                     As a case study, the project concentrates on the <cite class="title italic">Relaciones
                        Geográficas de la Nueva España</cite> (1577–1585), one of the key corpora for
                     understanding the early colonial period of Mexico.
                  </p>
                  
                  <p>Using a computer–assisted methodology called Geographical Text Analysis (GTA), the
                     project offers automatic means for parsing historical texts and the markup of words
                     referring both to place names (toponyms) and analytical concepts that are then linked
                     to their geographic locations. Adding geospatial intelligence to the parsing of texts
                     allows exploring hidden geographies and narratives in the historic corpus. The
                     article provides a general overview of the corpus, describes the GTA methodology step
                     by step, and reports on the progress achieved so far.
                  </p>
                  
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">1. Introduction</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p1">1</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p1">This article introduces the project <cite class="title italic">Digging into Early Colonial
                        Mexico: A Large–Scale Computational Analysis of Sixteenth–Century Historical
                        Sources</cite>, and describes the progress achieved so far.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e367">[1]</a> The project focuses on
                     developing novel methods and tools for mining new knowledge from textual and
                     pictorial historical records to facilitate the study of early Latin American history.
                     It concentrates on one of the most important corpora related to the geography,
                     culture, religion, economy, and history of native and Spanish peoples in Mexico and
                     Guatemala, namely the <cite class="title italic">Relaciones Geográficas de la Nueva
                        España</cite> (Geographic Reports from New Spain), and specifically those
                     compiled between 1577 and 1585, hereafter referred to as RGs.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p2">2</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p2">The proposed methodology — called Geographical Text Analysis (GTA) — enables the
                     automatic markup of words referring both to place names (toponyms) and analytical
                     concepts relevant to historical research, and adds geospatial intelligence to the
                     parsing of texts. This process is useful not only to find the most salient terms in
                     textual corpora or to identify and disambiguate personal and geographical names, but
                     also to facilitate the discovery of unsuspected data patterns and relationships, such
                     as spatial correlation of events, interaction of people, links of persons and themes
                     to places, and many others.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p3">3</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p3">One of the main contributions of this project has been the development of an
                     analytical model based on deep-learning and adapted to the specific challenges found
                     in texts like the RGs. In order to achieve named entity recognition, disambiguation
                     and classification, GTA employs methodologies from the fields of Natural Language
                     Processing (NLP), Corpus Linguistics (CL) and Machine Learning (ML). Although NLP,
                     CL
                     and ML techniques are used frequently in textual analysis today, they are most
                     commonly applied to contemporary texts composed in English. Little work has been done
                     to adapt their use to historical corpora written in old language forms like the
                     sixteenth–century Spanish.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e385">[2]</a> The RG corpus additionally contains other
                     features that complicate the use of such tools, which makes very difficult the
                     automatic “reading” of the documents. These include the presence of
                     multi-lingual expressions in Nahuatl, Zapotec, Otomi, and many other indigenous
                     languages <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#harvey1972">#harvey1972</a></span>, as well vocabulary only used in certain
                     regions at the time. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p4">4</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p4">A second contribution of our project has been to facilitate, using Geographical
                     Information Systems (GIS), the automatic linking of the results of these processes
                     of
                     textual analysis with locational data. This combination of NLP, CL and ML techniques
                     with spatial analysis methods creates powerful resources to discover unsuspected
                     geographies in the textual reports. Our model will allow scholars of colonial Latin
                     America to learn new information, extract it, cross–link it to other document
                     resources, and, most importantly, study significant historical topics, such as those
                     we discuss in section 3.5 below. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p5">5</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p5">Apart from the GTA model itself, we foresee several other products of this project.
                     The first is a digital version of the RGs corpus, annotated in accordance with
                     analytical categories that can be applied to other corpora through an interoperable
                     ontology. The second is a digital gazetteer containing geographic coordinates as well
                     as political, cultural, administrative and physical data, not only of the
                     sixteenth-century sites mentioned in the RGs, but from other relevant sources and
                     historical periods. The third is a set of software tools that link the spatial
                     information contained in the gazetteer with the textual and pictorial contents of
                     the
                     RGs in order to facilitate the discovery and analysis of geographies not immediately
                     apprehended with normal reading. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p6">6</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p6">In writing this paper, our goal is to raise awareness about the possibilities of
                     applying computer-assisted methods to the analysis of historical texts. Thus, we
                     describe every step of GTA in the context of our specific study case, hoping that
                     this will encourage more Humanities researchers to adopt this kind of approach.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p7">7</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p7">The rest of the article is organized as follows: Section 2 provides an overview of
                     the <cite class="title italic">Relaciones Geográficas</cite> corpus; Section 3 describes
                     our analytic methodology and reports on our progress; Section 4 describes future
                     applications to the study of history; and the final section offers a general
                     conclusion.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">2. The Sixteenth Century Relaciones Geográficas de la Nueva España</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p8">8</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p8">The compilation of the <cite class="title italic">Relaciones Geográficas de la Nueva
                        España</cite> was part of a large, long–standing project, sponsored first by
                     Emperor Charles V and then by King Philip II, who sought to collect geographic,
                     economic, historic and cultural information from all the kingdoms and territories
                     under their rule. The initiative emerged not only from the need to control the
                     exploitation of resources and resolve important issues such as land possession,
                     management of labor and the transfer of privileges to colonists, but also to compile
                     scientific knowledge and fulfill intellectual curiosity <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#delgado2010">#delgado2010</a></span>
                     <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#delagarza1983">#delagarza1983</a></span>. This involved both collecting descriptions and making
                     maps [<a class="ref" href="#mundy1996">Mundy 1996</a>, 1–27]. The whole project included Castile,
                     Aragon, Italy, the Netherlands, Portugal (since its annexation in 1581), and the
                     viceroyalties of Peru and New Spain.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p9">9</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p9">For the New World enterprise, the Spanish king, through the Council of Indies,
                     commissioned his leading cosmographers to gather information by means of
                     questionnaires. These were conceived by Juan de Ovando and sent to the Indies in 1569
                     (37 questions), 1570 (200 questions) and 1573 (135 questions). The responses that
                     came back to Madrid, however, were scarce, probably because the burden of collecting
                     data was put on high-level ecclesiastical and government officials who lacked the
                     necessary knowledge or were not willing to answer so many questions. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p10">10</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p10">The project was revived by Juan López de Velasco, cosmographer–chronicler of Philip
                     II, who in 1577 devised more feasible enquiries. The first one attempted to gather
                     observations about moon eclipses from various parts of the Indies [<a class="ref" href="#cline1964">Cline 1964</a>]. This would allow solving the elusive problem of determining
                     longitude coordinates for the American territories, which in turn would make it
                     possible to establish correctly the position of the Indies with respect to Europe
                     in
                     a universal map [<a class="ref" href="#edwards1969">Edwards 1969</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#mundy1996">Mundy 1996</a>, 17–9]. A second independent enquiry sought to
                     complete the scarce descriptions received in the previous years, sending only fifty
                     carefully formulated questions to be answered not by high-level authorities, as in
                     previous attempts, but by <span class="foreign i">corregidores</span> and <span class="foreign i">alcaldes mayores</span>, the local administrative officials with
                     direct knowledge of the situation in towns, villages and hamlets, who also received
                     printed instructions on how to answer the survey. Figure 1 shows the first page (out
                     of three) of the printed <cite class="title italic">Instrucción y Memoria</cite> sent as a
                     guide to the respondents.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p11">11</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p11">The questionnaire included very detailed information about the life in New Spain.
                     One
                     single query might cover topics such as demography, type of settlements,
                     intercultural opinions, and ethnolinguistics.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e471">[3]</a> There are also questions about local history, including the
                     names and settlement of towns, and about agricultural and mineral resources. See
                     Appendix 1 for a complete translation of the questionnaire. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p12">12</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p12">Responses to the questionnaire were produced between 1579 and 1585 and are now held
                     in Spain, Scotland, and the United States. In total there are 168 written reports
                     corresponding to an equal number of main <span class="foreign i">cabeceras</span>
                     (“head-towns” or main districts). These also contain descriptions of 248
                     subordinate jurisdictions, 414 towns and many smaller villages and hamlets [<a class="ref" href="#cline1964">Cline 1964</a>]. Together they cover more than half the political
                     subdivisions existing in New Spain circa 1580 [<a class="ref" href="#cline1972c">Cline 1972c</a>].<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e510">[4]</a> Figure 2 reproduces one of the
                     manuscript pages of the Relación de Atlatlauhca (present–day Atlatlauhcán,
                     Morelos).
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p13">13</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p13">Alongside the texts, the corpus contains 78 maps. Some were painted by indigenous
                     artists following native representations of places and landscape (Figure 3 and Figure
                     4), while others were clearly drawn by creoles or peninsular Spaniards (Figure 5).
                     In
                     the words of <a href="#robertson1972">Robertson (1972: 243)</a>, they
                     represent “the largest single group of interrelated early
                     colonial pictorial manuscripts which has come down to us.”<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e538">[5]</a> Of these maps, 23 came from Mexico; 3 from Michoacán; 1
                     from Nueva Galicia; 21 from Oaxaca; 18 from Tlaxcala; 3 from Yucatán and 2 from
                     Guatemala. There are also accounts of 26 manuscripts and 16 maps lost centuries ago
                     [<a class="ref" href="#cline1972c">Cline 1972c</a>, Tables 6 and 10]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#robertson1972">Robertson 1972</a>], as well as an additional map that disappeared more
                     recently [<a class="ref" href="#mundy1996">Mundy 1996</a>, 226]. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p14">14</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p14">Despite the fact that some authors failed to answer several questions, both the texts
                     and the maps offer favorable conditions to test new approaches for the analysis of
                     large historical corpora. The corpus of RGs offers highly structured information —
                     due to the standardized questionnaire — which gives the reports a degree of
                     homogeneity rarely seen in other sixteenth–century collections. The geographic
                     descriptions also cover more than half the territory of New Spain and the level of
                     detail is remarkable not only in terms of orography, landscape, and natural
                     resources, but also the way of life of native peoples and colonists, as well as the
                     interactions between different social groups. Such richness, consistency, and span
                     facilitate comparative research across small, medium, and large areas on topics of
                     social, historical, ethnographic, linguistic, economic, and political interest.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p15">15</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p15">A further reason for selecting the RGs is a desire to improve the accessibility and
                     valorization of the corpus as a main source for historical enquiry. Seminal research
                     has been conducted by <span class="error"><a href="#cline1972">Cline (1972)</a></span>, <span class="error"><a href="#bravo-garcia2018">Bravo-García (2018)</a></span>, <span class="error"><a href="#gerhard1972">Gerhard (1972)</a></span>, <a href="#gruzinski1991">Gruzinski (1991)</a>, <a href="#morenotoscano1968">Moreno Toscano (1968)</a>, <a href="#mundy1996">Mundy (1996)</a> and a few other scholars [<a class="ref" href="#cacereslorenzo2013">Cáceres Lorenzo 2013</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#delgadolopez2010">Delgado López 2010</a>]. The publications by <span class="error"><a href="#cline1972">Cline
                           (1972)</a></span> and <span class="error"><a href="#gerhard1972">Gerhard (1972)</a></span>, for example,
                     were ground-breaking works of Mexican historical geography. <a href="#morenotoscano1968">Moreno Toscano (1968)</a>, on the other hand, used
                     the complete textual information of the RGs to perform a matrix analysis oriented
                     to
                     reconstruct the economic geography of New Spain, whilst <a href="#mundy1996">Mundy (1996)</a> analyzed all the surviving maps to identify continuities and
                     changes in the indigenous cartographic tradition during the colonial period. For his
                     part, <a href="#gruzinski1991">Gruzinski (1991: 77-103)</a> has
                     approached the corpus by studying how the contrasting — sometimes conflicting —
                     worldview of conquistadors and native peoples shaped the responses to the
                     questionnaire, pointing out interesting details about the colonization of the
                     imaginary.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p16">16</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p16">Single documents of the <cite class="title italic">Relaciones</cite> have also been the
                     focus of historical research <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#afanador-pujol2015">#afanador-pujol2015</a></span>
                     [<a class="ref" href="#ballesteros2005">Bellesteros García 2005</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#barlow1949">Barlow 1949</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#fernandez2006">Fernández Christlieb 2006</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#morato-moreno2017">Morato-Moreno 2017</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#mundy2013">Mundy 2013</a>]
                     <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#nutall1926">#nutall1926</a></span> (among others), but in general the textual and
                     cartographic documents have served as ancillary sources in regional studies, rather
                     than as a principal mine of data [<a class="ref" href="#dahlgren1954">Dahlgren de Jordan 1954</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#brand1960">Brand 1960</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#gibson1967">Gibson 1967</a>]. This is due perhaps to the difficulty of cross–linking
                     information among the many documents or to a lack of tools for uncovering
                     non–explicit knowledge hidden in the subtext of the answers to the questionnaire.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">3. Methodology and current progress </h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p17">17</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p17">As discussed in the introduction, we are developing advanced tools for unveiling new
                     information from the RGs corpus by applying a methodology known as Geographical Text
                     Analysis (GTA). The resulting digital resources and software tools will be released
                     at the end of the project under an open-access license. The methodology was
                     originally produced by some members of this project to reveal new, unsuspected
                     patterns of information by focusing on the geographic components of the historical
                     narrative [<a class="ref" href="#cooper2011">Cooper and Gregory 2011</a>]
                     <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#murrieta2015">#murrieta2015</a></span>
                     [<a class="ref" href="#donaldson2015">Donaldson et al. 2015</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#gregory2015">Gregory et al. 2015</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#porter2015">Porter et al. 2015</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#martins2017">Martins and Murrieta-Flores 2017</a>]
                     <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#murrieta-flores2017">#murrieta-flores2017</a></span>
                     [<a class="ref" href="#gregory2018">Gregory et al. 2018</a>]. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p18">18</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p18">We are now in the process of refining and extending this methodology with
                     contributions from all members of this project and from researchers engaged in
                     parallel initiatives (e.g., <span class="error"><a href="#santos2017">Santos et al. 2017</a></span>; <a href="#santos2018">Santos et al. 2018</a>; <a href="#won2018">Won et al.,
                        2018</a>). In this particular project we followed four phases: obtaining a
                     computer-readable corpus, the creation of a gazetteer, the semantic annotation and
                     geoparsing of the corpus, and data mining and historical analysis. In the following
                     sections, we discuss each stage in detail.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">3.1 First phase: Obtaining a computer-readable corpus</h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p19">19</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p19">The first phase of the methodology is obtaining computer–readable files from the
                        more comprehensive editions of the RGs. We began with Francisco del Paso y
                        Troncoso’s <cite class="title italic">Papeles de Nueva España</cite>, which contains a
                        significant portion of the corpus. Transcriptions from the original manuscripts
                        were already available in electronic format, but it was necessary to identify and
                        correct significant errors caused by the Optical Character Recognition (OCR)
                        software. This is a common problem with old documents, to which Alpert–Abrams
                        offers an approach in her 2016 article on the corpus known as <cite class="title italic">Primeros Libros</cite>.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p20">20</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p20">After completing six volumes of <cite class="title italic">Papeles de Nueva
                           España</cite> (Del Paso y Troncoso 1905), the work continued with the RGs from
                        Yucatán, published in volume 11 of <cite class="title italic">Colección de documentos
                           inéditos de las posesiones de España en ultramar</cite> (1898). Additionally,
                        thanks to a generous permission from the National Autonomous University of Mexico
                        (UNAM), we were also able to digitize a more recent version of the 54 RGs from
                        Yucatán transcribed and edited by <span class="error"><a href="#delagarza1983">De la Garza
                              (1983)</a></span> and to acquire in a digital format 114 RGs published in ten
                        volumes by <a href="#acuna1982">Acuña (1982–1988)</a>. In the end, we
                        obtained two versions of the whole corpus in machine–readable format: the first
                        one includes the notes, references and commentary from the scholars who
                        transcribed and studied the documents, while the second contains only the
                        transcription of the original RGs texts. A third version that includes all the NLP
                        annotations was produced during the third phase of the project.
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">3.2 Second phase: Creation of a gazetteer</h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p21">21</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p21">The second phase starts with a compilation of all the place names that exist in
                        the corpus as well as many others from relevant sources, and then solving any
                        linguistic and locational uncertainties that prevent their unequivocal
                        identification.
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="div div2">
                        
                        <h3 class="head">3.2.1 Compilation of place names.</h3>
                        
                        <div class="counter"><a href="#p22">22</a></div>
                        <div class="ptext" id="p22">This is done by extracting toponym indices from published editions of the RGs,
                           as well as from comprehensive studies on the historic geography of New Spain
                           (<a href="#gerhard1972a">Gerhard 1972a</a>, <a href="#gerhard1972b">1972b</a>, <a href="#gerhard1991">1991</a>;
                           <a href="#cline1972a">Cline 1972a</a>, <a href="#cline1972b">1972b</a>, <a href="#cline1972c">1972c</a>; <a href="#morenotoscano1968">Moreno Toscano, 1968</a>; <a href="#tanck2005">Tanck de Estrada et al., 2005</a>). Through this
                           procedure, the UK and Mexican teams were able to compile a list of 14,654 place
                           names (<a href="#liceras-garrido2019">Liceras-Garrido et al.
                              2019</a>).
                        </div>
                        
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="div div2">
                        
                        <h3 class="head">3.2.2 Linguistic disambiguation.</h3>
                        
                        <div class="counter"><a href="#p23">23</a></div>
                        <div class="ptext" id="p23">The resulting list was then subjected to a linguistic disambiguation process,
                           during which the most difficult challenges were dealing with place names found
                           in different native languages, as well as resolving name variations and
                           spelling inconsistencies. Important names of cities, like Tlaxcala, have
                           remained in original form since the sixteenth century, but many others have
                           changed significantly over time for a variety of reasons, including: historic
                           causes;<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e743">[6]</a> renaming due to
                           changes in the boundaries of original settlements;<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e746">[7]</a> and addition of words such as the name of a patron saint to
                           an indigenous toponym.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e749">[8]</a> Another problem relates to spelling variations of the
                           same toponym,<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e752">[9]</a>
                           the application of Castilian transliterations to the names of ancient
                           settlements,<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e755">[10]</a> or dealing with homonymies.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e759">[11]</a>
                           
                        </div>
                        
                        <div class="counter"><a href="#p24">24</a></div>
                        <div class="ptext" id="p24">State–of–the–art methods to tackle these challenges are discussed in <a href="#nick2017">Nick and Tent (2017)</a> and <a href="#santos2015">Santos et al. (2015</a>, <span class="error"><a href="#santos2017">2017</a></span>, <a href="#santos2018">2018</a>). Additionally, there is a valuable body of
                           research on the subject of Mexican toponomy, so we have benefited from
                           publications by <a href="#anayamonroy1960">Anaya Monroy (1960)</a>, <span class="error"><a href="#guzmanbetancourt1987">Guzmán Betancourt (1987</a></span>, <span class="error"><a href="#guzmanbetancourt1989">1989</a></span>, <span class="error"><a href="#guzmanbetancourt1998">1998</a></span>), <span class="error"><a href="#lefevre2017">Lefevre and Paredes Martínez (2017)</a></span>, <a href="#leonportilla2002">León Portilla (2002)</a>, <span class="error"><a href="#marquez1998">Márquez and Ramos
                                 Navarro Wold (1998)</a></span>, <a href="#mundy2014">Mundy (2014)</a>, <a href="#muntzel2010">Muntzel and Villegas Molina (2010)</a>, etc. This
                           adds to the exhaustive research done by the editors of the RGs, especially <a href="#acuna1982">Acuña (1982–1988)</a>, <span class="error"><a href="#delagarza1983">De
                                 la Garza (1983)</a></span> and <a href="#delpaso1905">Del Paso y Troncoso
                              (1905)</a>. 
                        </div>
                        
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="div div2">
                        
                        <h3 class="head">3.2.3. Geographic disambiguation.</h3>
                        
                        <div class="counter"><a href="#p25">25</a></div>
                        <div class="ptext" id="p25">Another challenge at this stage is finding latitude and longitude coordinates
                           of towns and villages. The solution involves, first, detecting and merging
                           duplicate entries by comparing the place name list with records found in online
                           geographical databases, such as the catalogue of indigenous localities,
                           produced by Instituto Nacional de Estadística Geografía a Informática (INEGI)
                           and Comisión Nacional para el Conocimiento y Uso de la Biodiversidad (CONABIO);<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e824">[12]</a> the geographic dataset created for the cartography of Mexico by INEGI;
                           the general registrar of archaeological sites compiled by Instituto Nacional de
                           Antropología e Historia (INAH);<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e830">[13]</a> the GeoNames geographical database;<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e836">[14]</a> and the Getty Thesaurus of Geographical Names.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e842">[15]</a> Through both linguistic and locational disambiguation, we were able to
                           obtain 12,748 correct names. Of these, we have so far been able to pin-point
                           3919 physical locations (Figure 6), which are the entries used for the
                           gazetteer.
                        </div>
                        
                        <div class="counter"><a href="#p26">26</a></div>
                        <div class="ptext" id="p26">The structure of the gazetteer complies with Linked Open Data standards to
                           guarantee its interoperability between different systems and repositories and
                           facilitate its application into other projects. We have relied on the
                           experience of massive reference resources like the Getty Thesaurus of
                           Geographical Names<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e851">[16]</a> and
                           especially the Alexandria Digital Library Gazetteer (ADL), from which we
                           adopted the relational database schema [<a class="ref" href="#hill2000">Hill 2000</a>]
                           [<a class="ref" href="#hill1999">Hill et al. 1999</a>]. For importing and exporting data, we adopted the
                           file format JSON, created by the World Historical Gazetteer<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e860">[17]</a>,
                           which is now an accepted standard in many textual annotation and analysis
                           platforms, such as Recogito. The database of our gazetteer will be made
                           available through the World Historical Gazetteer, the Pelagios Network, and
                           through Recogito. In addition, the gazetteer will be also available in a
                           standalone downloadable GIS format from the project’s website and
                           repositories.
                        </div>
                        
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">3.3 Third phase: Semantic annotation of the corpus</h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p27">27</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p27">The third stage comprises four tasks: defining an annotation schema by selecting
                        the most relevant analytic categories for the intended historical analysis;
                        annotating manually, and in accordance with the previously defined annotation
                        schema, two different samples of documents: one for training the NLP deep-learning
                        model and another one to validate it; tuning the deep-learning model to
                        automatically perform name entity recognition, disambiguation and classification,
                        in order to obtain a fully annotated corpus; and assessing the performance of the
                        model in accordance with the gold-standard validated by experts. 
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="div div2">
                        
                        <h3 class="head">3.3.1 Defining the annotation schema (ontology).</h3>
                        
                        <div class="counter"><a href="#p28">28</a></div>
                        <div class="ptext" id="p28">The selection of the ontology categories can be done by consensus among expert
                           linguists and historians, or with the help of automatic computer methods that
                           extract a “seed ontology” directly from the corpus
                           [<a class="ref" href="#eynard2012">Eynard et al. 2012</a>]. The first method is more time-consuming, but it
                           is simpler and on many occasions yields better results, so this was the
                           approach we followed.
                        </div>
                        
                        <div class="counter"><a href="#p29">29</a></div>
                        <div class="ptext" id="p29">The RGs ontology contains 21 entity classes and many more sub-categories
                           relevant to social, political, territorial and economic terms appearing
                           recurrently through the RGs (Table 2). For example, the general entity class
                           “architecture” includes sub-categories such as “domestic” and
                           “religious,” which offers the possibility to distinguish between house
                           and convent buildings described in texts. Another class “cosmogony”
                           includes sub-categories such as “ritual,”
                           “festivity,”
                           “deity,” etc. Each entity type follows the definitions and linked-data
                           standards of DBpedia to ensure the interoperability of our dataset.
                        </div>
                        
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="div div2">
                        
                        <h3 class="head">3.3.2 Manual annotation of text samples for training the NLP model.</h3>
                        
                        <div class="counter"><a href="#p30">30</a></div>
                        <div class="ptext" id="p30">Using such entity classes we carried out a manual annotation of two samples of
                           18 out of 168 documents (10% of the corpus) from the RGs using the online
                           tagging tools developed by Tagtog, a commercial company that generously
                           provided a free license to our project.<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e922">[18]</a> In order to ensure the quality of the
                           annotated samples, five experts tagged the same documents independently. We
                           then obtain statistics on the level of consensus among the experts by using the
                           inter-annotator agreement tool from Tagtog. Figure 7 illustrates an annotated
                           document.
                        </div>
                        
                     </div>
                     
                     <div class="div div2">
                        
                        <h3 class="head">3.3.3 Development of the NLP deep-learning model.</h3>
                        
                        <div class="counter"><a href="#p31">31</a></div>
                        <div class="ptext" id="p31">Once the training and gold-standard sample data are available, the actual
                           development of the NLP model can begin. Our team in Portugal, led by Bruno
                           Martins, combined two state-of-the-art approaches of deep-learning: neural
                           networks and word embedding.
                        </div>
                        
                        <div class="div div3">
                           
                           <h4 class="head">3.3.3.1 Neural networks.</h4>
                           
                           <div class="counter"><a href="#p32">32</a></div>
                           <div class="ptext" id="p32">A neural network is a computational model, loosely inspired on the neural
                              structure of the brain, that is able to “learn by example” how to
                              perform repetitive complex tasks. In the NLP and CL fields, it is applied,
                              among other things, to perform word classification, or the assigning of a
                              label to each word in an input text, indicating whether it belongs to a
                              certain semantic category (e.g. toponym, person, animal, plant, institution,
                              cultural concept), or to a “part-of-speech” syntactic category (i.e.
                              noun, pronoun, adjective, determiner, verb, adverb, preposition,
                              conjunction, and interjection).
                           </div>
                           
                           <div class="counter"><a href="#p33">33</a></div>
                           <div class="ptext" id="p33">Modern NLP software libraries leverage such statistical models [<a class="ref" href="#goldberg2017">Goldberg 2017</a>], making probabilistic decisions on the best
                              annotations for previously unseen texts. One of the best is SpaCy. To run a
                              deep-learning model in SpaCy we need to conduct a training phase during
                              which the software is fed with the training data sample (in our case 10% of
                              the corpus). This annotated training sample contains many known examples of
                              the kind of words expected in the unannotated text (the remaining 90% of the
                              corpus). 
                           </div>
                           
                           <div class="counter"><a href="#p34">34</a></div>
                           <div class="ptext" id="p34">Because we know the correct answers — thanks to the gold-standard data
                              sample — , we can give the model feedback on its predictions in the form of
                              an error gradient or the loss function that calculates the difference
                              between the training example and the expected output. If the accuracy of the
                              annotations is not sufficient, then an iterative refining process can be
                              carried out until accomplishing satisfactory results.
                           </div>
                           
                           <div class="counter"><a href="#p35">35</a></div>
                           <div class="ptext" id="p35">Then, to link the gazetteer with the corpus texts, it is necessary to assign
                              correct longitude and latitude coordinates to each toponym recognized by the
                              neural network. The Mordecai geoparsing library [<a class="ref" href="#halterman2017">Halternamn 2017</a>] is a good tool for that job. It takes as input the place names recognized
                              by SpaCy, and uses an index over the contents of the gazetteer to find the
                              potential coordinates of extracted place names. In other words, the names
                              recognized in the text are matched against similar names in the gazetteer.
                              Through this process the gazetteer and the corpus are finally linked and
                              ready for the implementation of query tools.
                           </div>
                           
                        </div>
                        
                        <div class="div div3">
                           
                           <h4 class="head">3.3.3.2 Word-embedding.</h4>
                           
                           <div class="counter"><a href="#p36">36</a></div>
                           <div class="ptext" id="p36">Complementing the above procedures, the word–embedding algorithm makes it
                              easier for the neural network to distinguish all of the different semantic
                              contexts in which a word might be used. This process follows the idea that
                              “a word is characterized by the company it
                              keeps”
                              <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#firth1957">#firth1957</a></span>. For example, in the phrase “[t]he order of San Francisco was established in these lands in
                              1524,” the term “San Francisco” refers to an institution, but
                              in “[t]he mendicant friars helped the poor following the
                              teachings of San Francisco,” the same term refers to a person. In
                              another context, it could mean a geographic location, as for instance in the
                              sentence “San Francisco Tlalcilalcalpan is inhabited at
                              the present by 18,721 people.”
                           </div>
                           
                           <div class="counter"><a href="#p37">37</a></div>
                           <div class="ptext" id="p37">We specifically pre-trained a word–embedding algorithm in an unsupervised
                              way to statistically predict the meaning of words in the context of real
                              natural language utterances. Thus, we needed training data sufficiently big
                              and varied to tackle the specific challenges of the RGs. One is that the
                              spelling in the corpus varies considerably among the many authors. This is
                              sometimes, in part, because words are spelled in accordance with their Latin
                              origin, rather than their actual pronunciation. Another is that the corpus
                              borrows heavily on vocabulary from indigenous languages, especially place
                              names, and terms to identify flora, fauna, cultural concepts, etc.
                           </div>
                           
                           <div class="counter"><a href="#p38">38</a></div>
                           <div class="ptext" id="p38">Given the fact that the structure of modern Spanish still resembles to a
                              high degree the language recorded in the RGs, we decided to combine modern
                              and historical data sources to train our model. Contemporary data came from
                              several Spanish corpora such as ANCora [<a class="ref" href="#taule2008">Taulé et al. 2008</a>], IMPACT-es
                              [<a class="ref" href="#sanchez-martinez2013">Sánchez–Martínez et al. 2013</a>], or the <cite class="title italic">Corpus
                                 del Español</cite>, <a class="noteRef" href="#d4e1001">[19]</a> while numerous examples of sixteenth–century Spanish texts from
                              different archives and ten dictionaries of indigenous languages <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#garciacubas1888">#garciacubas1888</a></span>
                              <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#penafiel1987">#penafiel1987</a></span>
                              [<a class="ref" href="#robelo1897">Robelo 1897</a>]
                              [<a class="ref" href="#robelo1900">Robelo 1900</a>]
                              [<a class="ref" href="#robelo1902a">Robelo 1902a</a>]
                              [<a class="ref" href="#robelo1902b">Robelo 1902b</a>]
                              [<a class="ref" href="#robelo1904">Robelo 1904</a>]
                              [<a class="ref" href="#robelo1905">Robelo 1905</a>]
                              [<a class="ref" href="#starr1920">Starr 1920</a>] provided resources to deal with the language
                              complexities particular to New Spain.
                           </div>
                           
                           <div class="counter"><a href="#p39">39</a></div>
                           <div class="ptext" id="p39">By thus leveraging modern and historical data in a combined training
                              dataset, we can simultaneously benefit from having large amounts of
                              contextual information from which the model can learn more easily, together
                              with some data representing the specificities of historical Spanish.
                              Furthermore, to avoid problems with out-of-vocabulary words, such as those
                              brought forward by the inconsistent spelling or cultural expressions, we
                              used a word–embedding method that also creates representations for
                              sub-words, and which is able to reconstruct entire word representations from
                              such sub-words <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#bojanowski2017">#bojanowski2017</a></span>.
                           </div>
                           
                        </div>
                        
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">4. Future Work: Data mining and historical analysis</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p40">40</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p40">At this stage, several data mining and analysis procedures can be carried out. The
                     first is an adaptation of collocation analysis — a technique from Corpus Linguistics
                     (CL) — which allows for extracting the most statistically significant phrases that
                     are found next to a term or keyword of interest (the “collocates,” in CL
                     jargon). Our variant of the technique is <em class="term">geographic collocation
                        analysis</em>, originally developed by the research group at Lancaster [<a class="ref" href="#gregory2015">Gregory et al. 2015</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#murrieta-flores2015">Murrieta-Flores et al. 2015</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#murrieta-flores2017a">Murrieta-Flores et al. 2017</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#murrieta-flores2017b">Murrieta-Flores and Gregory 2017</a>]. This facilitates the recognition and
                     retrieval, across the corpus, of all place names that collocate or are close to a
                     keyword of interest according to a predefined proximity threshold, usually defined
                     in
                     terms of the maximum number of words between the search–term and the collocate. In
                     this manner, if a researcher is interested in investigating economic aspects related
                     to agriculture, they could retrieve, for instance, all phrases in the context of
                     words like <span class="foreign i">maíz</span>, <span class="foreign i">siembra</span>, <span class="foreign i">subsistencia</span>, <span class="foreign i">mantenimientos</span>, <span class="foreign i">comida</span>
                     (i.e. “maize”, “sowing”, “subsistence”, “sustenance”,
                     “food”), which would appear linked to a map showing the geographic locations
                     where such terms appear. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p41">41</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p41">Furthermore, by putting words in context through collocation, a historian could
                     extract in a few seconds — as opposed to the weeks that it would take to access the
                     information without GTA tools — interesting details about the first colonists in New
                     Spain. Such a query, for instance, might involve running a collocate search of the
                     word “conquistador” (Figure 8). Another type of search can be conducted using general
                     categories, such as employing the term “food” to retrieve words like
                     “beans,”
                     “fish,” or “bread” (Figure 9).
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p42">42</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p42">In the following subsections, we highlight several topics of historic analysis that
                     we plan to examine through this research.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">4.1 Historical phenomena changing the face of New Spain at the end of the
                        sixteenth century
                     </h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p43">43</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p43">One area of application for the techniques detailed in this study is understanding
                        the coexistence of competing systems of land ownership and labor in New Spain
                        during the colonial period. In New Spain during the short time of compilation of
                        the RGs, there was a strong debate about the system of <span class="foreign i">encomiendas</span> and the desire to replace it with the so-called <span class="foreign i">repartimientos</span>. The <span class="foreign i">encomienda</span> was the right to exploit the labor of indigenous
                        populations, granted by the Spanish Crown to conquistadors, who at the beginning
                        of the colonization held this privilege in perpetuity and could, therefore, pass
                        it to their descendants with little intervention from the royal government in
                        Madrid. In contrast, the <span class="foreign i">repartimiento</span> only
                        allocated the labor force of native workers for a fixed period of time in exchange
                        for a meager remuneration. The latter gave the royal government more control over
                        its subjects and resources. Neither the holders of <span class="foreign i">encomiendas</span> nor <span class="foreign i">repartimientos</span> were
                        allowed to appropriate lands, as private property was reserved for <span class="foreign i">haciendas</span>. These three systems coexisted in the 1570s
                        despite the enactment of the so-called New Laws in 1542, which attempted to
                        protect the rights of the indigenous populations and prevent the dispossession of
                        their lands by abolishing the <span class="foreign i">encomiendas</span>.
                        Throughout the texts of the RGs, therefore, it is common to find claims by
                        conquistadors’ descendants of their <span class="foreign i">encomienda</span>
                        rights, and others defending the benefits of <span class="foreign i">repartimientos</span>. A comprehensive study of the claims and contentions
                        found in the RG corpus would improve our understanding of the period.
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">4.2 The local government organization of New Spain toward the third quarter of
                        the sixteenth century
                     </h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p44">44</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p44">A second application of these methodologies has to do with disambiguating local
                        structures of governance in New Spain. The early colonial period was a time when
                        the functions and spheres of influence of the four branches of colonial government
                        were not well defined, and consequently the spatial boundaries of the judicial,
                        administrative, military and ecclesiastical jurisdictions overlapped (Figure 10).
                        This was especially true at the municipal level. Consequently, the corpus contains
                        terms associated with several kinds of jurisdictions whose meanings were not
                        consistent throughout the vast territory of New Spain (e.g. <span class="hi italic">partidos de clérigos</span>, <span class="hi italic">distrito de mision</span>, <span class="hi italic">custodia</span>, <span class="hi italic">guardianía</span>, <span class="hi italic">vicaría, presidencia, </span>etc.). The subject has been a matter
                        of ongoing debate among historians (Gerhard, 1972b: 66), but we believe that
                        applying collocation analysis for extracting the contextual use of such words
                        would shed light on how those institutions functioned in parallel to <span class="hi italic">alcaldías mayores</span> and <span class="hi italic">corregimientos</span>
                        and this would be an important contribution to the knowledge of this period.
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">4.3 Settlement pattern analysis to elucidate the territorial organization of
                        New Spain 
                     </h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p45">45</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p45">A third area for future study has to do with demarcating the boundaries of
                        territories in New Spain. By reading the RGs, we could attempt to identify the
                        names and boundaries (<span class="foreign i">linderos</span>) of towns
                        belonging to <span class="foreign i">corregimientos</span> (territorial
                        demarcations for administrative and judicial purposes) mentioned in the corpus.
                        Circa 1570, there were 200 of such units whose frontiers have been outlined by
                        <a href="#gerhard1972a">Gerhard (1972a)</a>. However, the smaller
                        demarcations (towns, villages) suffered adjustments in boundaries and
                        jurisdictions. As Gerhard points out, at the time of the RGs, “[e]arly civil and ecclesiastical divisions lost importance and were
                        eliminated; others came into being as a result of conquest, proselytization,
                        mining activity, and other causes”
                        [<a class="ref" href="#gerhard1972b">Gerhard 1972b</a>, 66–9]. The application of a mathematical model
                        that analyzes the maximum available territory around each settlement within a
                        region, like the one proposed by <a href="#ducke2008">Ducke and Kroefges
                           (2008)</a>, could provide preliminary hypotheses on such demarcations. These
                        would then be tested against the actual historical information extracted from the
                        corpus through geographic collocation analysis. One of the many ways that such a
                        study could begin is by extracting references on the routes that local
                        administrators take for their visits to towns within their jurisdiction, the
                        distances they traversed, the geographic features and topography of the landscape,
                        etc. (Figure 10) This, and much other information, is available throughout the
                        corpus, but more specifically in the answers to questions 7, 8, 11, and 12 (see
                        <span class="error"><a href="#appendix01">Appendix 1</a></span>).
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">4.4 Analysis of historical diseases</h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p46">46</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p46">A fourth research question has to do with our understanding of the outbreak of
                        disease (1576-1581) that took the lives of half the population of New Spain during
                        the early colonial period [<a class="ref" href="#acuna-soto2004">Acuña–Soto et al. 2004</a>]. This was the second
                        time that <span class="foreign i">cocoliztli</span> (as the epidemic was called)
                        had decimated the native population, causing the disappearance of whole
                        communities, shortages in labor-force for the <span class="foreign i">encomiendas</span> and <span class="foreign i">repartimientos</span>, the
                        displacement of people over different regions, or, on the contrary, the
                        congregation of survivors (sometimes of different ethnic communities) in new
                        Indian towns, all of which altered dramatically the traditional settlement pattern
                        [<a class="ref" href="#gerhard1972a">Gerhard 1972a</a>, 24]. How did this phenomenon vary over
                        different regions? How many people died in each locality? How did this epidemic
                        compare with others in the past? How did the new settlement change in comparison
                        with Prehispanic times? These are all questions that GTA could help to answer by
                        collocating words and phrases related to health (such as diseases, symptoms, and
                        remedies) and analyzing them with spatial mathematical models of disease
                        contagion. 
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">4.5 The spatial distribution of natural resources (flora, fauna, minerals,
                        etc.) and exploitation practices at the time of the RGs
                     </h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p47">47</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p47">A fifth application of our methodology has to do with the study of natural
                        resources. GTA will allow the extraction and analysis of regional historical
                        information on natural resources such as plants. There are already interesting
                        archaeological, historical and ethnographic research related to plants and their
                        use in Mesoamerica, medicinal and otherwise [<a class="ref" href="#alboreszarate2015">Albores Zarate 2015</a>]
                        [<a class="ref" href="#chavezmejia2020">Chávez Mejía et al. 2020</a>]
                        [<a class="ref" href="#hersch1999">Hersch 1999</a>]. Some further research has been also dedicated to
                        assessing the importance of the trees and edible plants introduced by Europeans.
                        With the annotation of the RGs in this project and the development of GTA, it is
                        now possible not only to extract information regarding native and European plants
                        introduced in the different regions of New Spain, but also to contribute to
                        further debates. It is known, for instance, that Mesoamerican cultures had an
                        extended knowledge of plants for medicinal use and most of the research about this
                        has been carried out using colonial primary sources. We could now create a map of
                        all the plants mentioned in the RGs and compare this dataset with archaeological
                        data and other primary sources that were dedicated to the recording of medicinal
                        plants, such as the Códice Badiano or the Historia Natural de Nueva España. This
                        would allow researchers, for instance, to assess the continuation in the use of
                        specific plants for remedies and consumption in specific regions of New Spain.
                        Other interesting avenues of possible research with GTA analysis are the
                        availability of food and animals both native and introduced, the use of natural
                        resources, the existence of cultural artefacts, the presence of priests and
                        religious orders in particular regions, as well as types of architecture.
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="div div1">
                     
                     <h2 class="head">4.6 Exchange networks, trading practices and communication routes</h2>
                     
                     <div class="counter"><a href="#p48">48</a></div>
                     <div class="ptext" id="p48">An additional topic is the study of exchange networks and trading practices, as
                        well as communication routes, both terrestrial and aquatic, among the populations
                        described in the RGs. One such study has already been conducted by <span class="error"><a href="#favila-vazquez2019">Favila-Vázquez (2019)</a></span>, who successfully
                        reconstructed aquatic communication networks in the Rio Balsas region by
                        extracting information from the responses available to queries 38 to 47 of the RGs
                        (Figure 11). These contain crucial data regarding navigation by sea, including
                        location of ports and coastal landscape. Together with data from question 19
                        (focused on fluvial networks), the extraction of data from the RGs corpus allowed
                        Favila-Vázquez to reconstruct a riverine and coastal system of communication that
                        explains the spatial connectivity of the Valley of Mexico to the Pacific coast. 
                        
                     </div>
                     
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">5. Conclusion</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p49">49</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p49">Geographical Text Analysis can make an important contribution to the study of massive
                     corpora, like the RGs, by expediting the extraction and analysis of specific
                     information that would be too slow or cumbersome to find in big datasets through
                     traditional reading methods. It also can provide tools to uncover patterns behind
                     the
                     narrative of historical sources and link them to their geographic locations. Thus,
                     GTA creates a way for historians to apply what in computational literary studies is
                     called “distant reading.”<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e1270">[20]</a>
                     
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p50">50</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p50">At the same time, the use of geographic collocations and the concept of “keywords
                     in context” permit a more detailed, granular comprehension of the corpus by
                     identifying those parts that deserve a “close reading.” This flexibility has
                     been demonstrated in previous research projects employing GTA [<a class="ref" href="#donaldson2017">Donaldson et al. 2017</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#murrieta-flores2017a">Murrieta-Flores et al. 2017</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#taylor2017">Taylor et al. 2017</a>]. Having a multiplicity of “ place names in context”
                     associated with keywords of interest opens an unprecedented range of possibilities
                     in
                     terms of identifying information patterns and hypothesis–testing across large
                     corpora, which in turn allows answering historical questions in a way that would be
                     impossible otherwise. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p51">51</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p51">In such a context, the proposal of GTA must not be seen as an attempt to replace the
                     careful micro study of historical sources practiced by modern historians. More
                     exactly, GTA is a methodology for parsing and crosslinking information at a macro
                     scale throughout a whole corpus in a relatively short period of time, so historians
                     can use their efforts and time more efficiently to focus on the more important
                     documents or fragments of texts.
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p52">52</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p52">One of the main contributions of our project specifically has been adapting named
                     entity recognition, disambiguation, and classification techniques to text collections
                     that either belong to specific historical periods or might pose a further challenge
                     due to their multi–language nature. We have succeeded in developing a new
                     deep-learning model to process the language of the RGs despite the orthographic
                     variance across the corpus and the high frequency of indigenous vocabulary.
                     Nevertheless, there is still much work to be done, especially for the indigenous
                     languages of the Americas [<a class="ref" href="#mager2018">Mager et al. 2018</a>]. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p53">53</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p53">Finally, we have already produced a significant number of digital datasets of value,
                     such as the gazetteer, which includes not only sixteenth–century localities but place
                     names from other Mexican historic periods. Hopefully, these will prove valuable
                     resources for humanists engaged in studying the Latin American historical and
                     archaeological past. The methods and tools being developed by the project have the
                     advantage of being generic, and therefore, applicable to other corpora. 
                  </div>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p54">54</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p54">We are committed to releasing the digital products and software tools through several
                     repositories, including GitHub and our own online platform. Our hope is that scholars
                     from diverse fields will be able to identify the desired information, extract it,
                     cross–link it to other document resources, and most importantly, answer significant
                     research questions: Where do certain phenomena happen more often? Who was responsible
                     for certain events? What was happening in specific places at certain times? Such kind
                     of enquiry will take historical analysis a step further, contributing significantly
                     to advancing research on the colonial period in Latin America, and humanities
                     research more generally. 
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">The Questionnaire of the Relaciones Geográficas<a class="noteRef" href="#d4e1314">[21]</a>
                     
                  </h1>
                  
                  <div class="label bold">Memorandum Of The Things That Are To Be Answered, And Of That Which Shall Be
                     Taken Into Account.
                  </div>
                  <div class="ptext">
                     <ul class="list">
                        <li class="item">l. Firstly: For towns of Spaniards, state the name of the district or province
                           in which it lies. What does this name mean in the native language, and why is it
                           so called?
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">2. Who was the discoverer and conqueror of this province? By whose order was it
                           discovered? In what year was it discovered and conquered, as far as is readily
                           known?
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">3. What is the general climate and character of the province or district? Is it
                           very cold or hot, humid or dry? Does it have much or little rain, and when,
                           approximately, does it fall? How violently and from where does the wind blow, and
                           at what times of the year?
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">4. Is the terrain flat or rugged, clear or wooded, with many or few rivers or
                           springs, abundant in or lacking water? Is it fertile or without pasture, abundant
                           or lacking in fruits and sustenance?
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">5. Are there many or few Indians? Were there more or fewer at other times, and
                           what are the known causes of this? Are they presently settled in planned and
                           permanent towns? Describe the degree and quality of their intelligence,
                           inclinations, and way of life. Are there different languages in the province or a
                           general language that all speak? 
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">6. What is the latitude, or the altitude of the Pole Star, at each Spanish
                           town, if it has been taken and is known, or if anyone knows how to observe it? Or
                           on which days of the year does the sun not cast a shadow at midday?
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">7. What are the league distances and the direction of each Spanish city or town
                           in the district to the city of its <span class="hi italic">Audiencia, </span>or to the
                           town where the governor to whom it is subject
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">resides? </li>
                        <li class="item">8. Likewise, what are the league distances and the direction of each Spanish
                           city or town to adjacent ones? Are these leagues long or short, through flat or
                           hilly land, over straight or winding roads, easy or difficult to travel? 
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">9. What are the present and former names and surnames of each city or town? Why
                           are they so called, if known? Who gave each its name, who was its founder, by
                           whose order was it settled? What year was it founded? How many residents did the
                           settlement first have, and how many does it have now? 10. Describe the sites upon
                           which each town is established. Is each upon a height, or low-lying, or on a
                           plain? Make a map of the layout of the town, its streets, plazas and other
                           features, noting the monasteries, as well as can be sketched easily on paper. On
                           it show which part of the town faces south or north.
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">11. For native towns, state only how far they are from the town in whose
                           corregimiento or jurisdiction they are, and how far they lie from their cabecera
                           de doctrina. 
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">12. In addition, state how far the native towns lie from surrounding native or
                           Spanish towns. Declare for all their direction from these other towns. Are the
                           leagues long or short, the roads through level or hilly land, straight or
                           winding?
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">13. What does the name of this [native] town mean in the indigenous language?
                           Why is it called this, if known? What is the name of the language spoken by the
                           natives of this town?
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">14. Who were their rulers in heathen times? What rights did their former lords
                           have over them? What did they pay in tribute? What forms of worship, rites, and
                           good or evil customs did they practice? 
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">15. How were they governed? With whom did they wage war? How did they battle?
                           What was their battle dress and clothing like, both formerly and now? What was
                           their former and is their present means of subsistence? Were they more or less
                           healthy than now and what are reasons for this that you may know?
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">16. For all towns, both Spanish and native, describe the sites where they are
                           established. Are they in the mountains, in valleys, or on open flat land? Give the
                           names of the mountains, valleys, and districts, and for each, tell what the name
                           means in the indigenous language. 
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">17. Is the land or site healthy or unhealthy? If unhealthy, why (if it is
                           known)? What illnesses commonly occur, and what cures are commonly used for them?
                           
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">18. How far or near, and in what direction does each town lie from a nearby
                           prominent mountain or range? Supply its name.
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">19. What major river or rivers flow nearby? How distant and in what direction
                           do they lie? How great is their flow? Is there anything notable known about their
                           sources, water, orchards and other growth along their banks? Are there or could
                           there be irrigated lands of value?
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">20. What are the significant lakes, lagoons, or springs within the town
                           boundaries? Note anything remarkable about them.
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">21. What are the volcanoes, caves, and all other notable and remarkable aspects
                           of nature in the district worthy of being known?
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">22. Which wild trees and their fruits are commonly found in the district? What
                           are the uses of them and their woods, and to what good are they or could they be
                           put?
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">23. Which cultivated trees and fruit orchards are in the region? Which were
                           brought from Spain and elsewhere? Do these grow well?
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">24. What are the grains and seed plants, and other garden plants and vegetables
                           that are or have been used as sustenance for the natives?
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">25. Which were brought from Spain? Does the land yield wheat, barley, wine, or
                           olive oil, and in what quantities? Is there silk or cochineal in the region, and
                           in what quantities?
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">26. What are the herbs or aromatic plants that the natives use for healing?
                           What are their medicinal or poisonous properties? 
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">27. What animals and birds, both wild and domestic, are in the region? Which
                           ones were brought from Spain, and how well have they bred and multiplied?
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">28. In the region or within the town lands, are there any gold or silver mines
                           or sources of other metals, or black or colored pigments? 
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">29. Are there any quarries of precious stone, jasper, marble, or other notable
                           ones? What value might they have?
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">30. Are there sources of salt in the town or nearby? If [residents] lack salt
                           and other items necessary for their sustenance or clothing, where do they procure
                           all these things? 
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">31. How are the houses built and what is their form? What building materials
                           are found in the town, or brought from elsewhere?
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">32. What are the towns' fortifications? Are there barracks, or any fortified or
                           impregnable places within the boundaries of the district?
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">33. Through what dealings, trade, and profits do both Spaniards and Indians
                           live and sustain themselves? What are the items involved and with what do they pay
                           their tribute? 
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">34. In which diocese of the archbishopric, bishopric, or abbey does each town
                           lie? In which district does each lie? How many leagues and in which direction does
                           each town lie from the town of the cathedral and the cabecera of the district? Are
                           the leagues long or short, along straight or winding roads, and through flat or
                           hilly land?
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">35. In each town, what are the cathedral and parish church or churches? What is
                           the number of endowed church offices and allotments for clergymen's salaries in
                           each? Do any have a chapel or significant endowment, and, if so, whose it is and
                           who established it?
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">36. What are the monasteries or convents of each Order? By whom and when were
                           they founded? How many notable things do they contain? And what is the number of
                           religious?
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">37. What are the hospitals, schools, and charitable institutions in the towns?
                           By whom and when were they founded?
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">38. If the towns are on the seacoast, in addition to the above, report in your
                           account the nature of the sea in the vicinity, whether it is calm or stormy, the
                           nature of the storms and other dangers. What times, approximately, are they
                           frequent?
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">39. Is there beach or cliffs along the coast? What are the prominent reefs and
                           other dangers to navigation along it?
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">40. How great are the tides and tidal ranges? On which days and at which hours
                           do they occur? In which season are they greater or lesser?
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">41. What are the notable capes, points, bights, and bays in the district? Note
                           their names and sizes, as well as can be determined.
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">42. What are the ports and landings along the coast? Make a map showing their
                           shape and layout as can be drawn on a sheet of paper, in which form and proportion
                           can be seen.
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">43. What is their size and capacity? Note their approximate width and length in
                           leagues and paces, as well as can be determined. Also note how may ships they will
                           accommodate.
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">44. What is the depth in fathoms of each? Is the bottom clear? Are there any
                           shallows and shoals? Indicate their locations, and whether the port is free of
                           shipworm and other impediments.
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">45. What directions do their entrances and exits face? With which winds must
                           one enter and depart?
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">46. What are their advantages or lack of them in the way of firewood, water,
                           and provisions? What are the favorable or unfavorable considerations for entering
                           and remaining?
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">47. What are the names of the islands along the coast? Why are they so named?
                           Make a map, if possible, of their form and shape, showing their length, width, and
                           lay of the land. Note the soil, pastures, trees, and resources they may have,
                           their birds and animals, and the notable rivers and springs.
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">48. Where are the abandoned Spanish towns located in the region? When were they
                           settled and abandoned? What is known about the reasons for abandonment?
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">49. Describe any other of the notable aspects of nature, and any notable
                           qualities of the soil, air, and sky in any part of the region.
                        </li>
                        <li class="item">50. Having completed the account, the persons who have collaborated on it will
                           sign it. It must be returned without delay, along with these directions, to the
                           person from whom it was received.
                        </li>
                     </ul>
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               <div class="div div0">
                  
                  <h1 class="head">Acknowledgements</h1>
                  
                  <div class="counter"><a href="#p55">55</a></div>
                  <div class="ptext" id="p55">We would like to thank the generous grant awarded by the 2017 T–AP initiative of the
                     Trans–Atlantic Platform in Social Sciences and Humanities Research, as well as the
                     support received in each country by the Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC,
                     UK) (ES/R003890/1), the Foundation for Science and Technology (FCT, Portugal), and
                     the Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnología (project 275015). Likewise, we would
                     like to thank the Red Conacyt de Tecnologías Digitales para la Difusión del
                     Patrimonio Cultural (project 294971), also supported by Conacyt.
                  </div>
                  
               </div>
               
               
               <div class="counter"><a href="#p56">56</a></div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p56">Figure captions</div>
               
               <div class="counter"><a href="#p57">57</a></div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p57">Figure 1. First page of the printed <span class="hi italic">Instrucción y Memoria</span> sent by
                  the Council of Indies to guide the compilation of the <span class="hi italic">Relaciones
                     Geográficas</span>. Photograph courtesy of the Benson Latin American Collection. The
                  General Libraries, The University of Texas at Austin (JGI xxiii-13).
               </div>
               
               <div class="counter"><a href="#p58">58</a></div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p58">Figure 2. Manuscript from the <span class="hi italic">Relación of Atlatlauhca</span> (Morelos)
                  containing responses to the first two questions of the enquiry.
               </div>
               
               <div class="counter"><a href="#p59">59</a></div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p59">Figure 3. Map of Ixtapalapa (Ciudad de Mexico) included in the <span class="hi italic">Relación Geográfica de Ixtapalapa (1580), belonging to the corregimiento</span> of
                  Mexicaltzingo. Size of the original: 43 x 31 cm. The author is Martin Cano, a native
                  local artist, who, as Mundy (1996: 63) points out, is one of the uses pictographs
                  to
                  represent the town´s name, which in Nahuatl means “water near the flagstones”: “Below
                  the church, a hexagonal flagstone is surrounded by a blue ribbon of water. Ixtapalapa´s
                  church dominates one axis of the composition, while its twin community buildings,
                  at
                  left, dominate the other”. Photograph courtesy of the Benson Latin American Collection.
                  The General Libraries, The University of Texas at Austin (JGI xxiv-8).
               </div>
               
               <div class="counter"><a href="#p60">60</a></div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p60">Figure 4. Map of the <span class="hi italic">Relación de Amoltepec</span>. This is another
                  example of the indigenous tradition to represent a geographic region. The place names
                  of
                  neighbor and subject towns are drawn with logographs organized in a semi-circle,
                  surrounding the church and the ruler´s palace (Mundy, 1996: 113). Photograph courtesy
                  of
                  the Benson Latin American Collection. The General Libraries, The University of Texas
                  at
                  Austin (JGI xxiv-5).
               </div>
               
               <div class="counter"><a href="#p61">61</a></div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p61">Figure 5. Map of the <span class="hi italic">Relación de Tlacotalpa</span>. One of the best
                  examples of charts in the European tradition that can be found in the RGs corpus.
                  This
                  was produced by Francisco Stroza Gali, a professional mariner in 1580 (Mundy, 1996:
                  51).
                  A detailed study of the document reveals the extraordinary precision of the geographic
                  measurements achieved by Gali (Morato-Moreno, 2017). 
               </div>
               
               <div class="counter"><a href="#p62">62</a></div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p62">Figure 6. Location of the 3919 sites georeferenced so far (April 2020) through
                  linguistic and locational disambiguation, which are added to the project´s
                  gazetteer.
               </div>
               
               <div class="counter"><a href="#p63">63</a></div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p63">Figure 7. Annotation of the <span class="hi italic">Relación de Merida</span> with the Tagtog
                  software tool. Notice the color code to distinguish different annotation categories:
                  red
                  is used for words referring to persons, either by name, profession or roles; green
                  to
                  locations (either toponyms or geographic features); light blue to dates, and so on.
               </div>
               
               <div class="counter"><a href="#p64">64</a></div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p64">Figure 8. Extracting information with GTA tools (which are still a work in progress).
                  In
                  this example, the keyword “conquistador” is used to recover data from the colonists
                  mentioned in the <span class="hi italic">Relación de Tekal</span>. The map shows the location of
                  this town in Yucatán. Queries like this can be apply to a single document or to the
                  complete corpus.
               </div>
               
               <div class="counter"><a href="#p65">65</a></div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p65">Figure 9. Another type of query that retrieves works in context belonging to the food
                  category. In this example, the threshold for the collocation has been set 10 words
                  before and after the key category.
               </div>
               
               <div class="counter"><a href="#p66">66</a></div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p66">Figure 10. Map illustrating the overlapping of three types of colonial jurisdictions:
                  political (<span class="hi italic">gobiernos</span>), ecclesiastic (dioceses), and
                  administrative (<span class="hi italic">provincias</span>).
               </div>
               
               <div class="counter"><a href="#p67">67</a></div>
               <div class="ptext" id="p67">Figure 11. Map showing the location of towns that were part of the indigenous network
                  of
                  navigation through the Pacific coast and the Balsas river towards the third quarter
                  of
                  the 16th century. Photograph courtesy of Favila-Vázquez (2019).
               </div>
               
               
               
               
               
            </div>
            
            <div id="notes">
               <h2>Notes</h2>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e367"><span class="noteRef lang en">[1] This project
                     operates thanks to a grant received from the 2017 “Digging
                     into Data” initiative of the Trans–Atlantic Platform for Social Sciences
                     and Humanities Research (T-AP). T-AP is a consortium supported by research
                     institutions in 16 countries, among them the Economic and Social Research Council
                     (ESRC, UK), the Foundation for Science and Technology (FCT, Portugal), and the
                     National Council of Science and Technology (CONACyT, México). This project is
                     conducted by three teams of historians, archaeologists, geographers, linguists and
                     computer scientists from the following institutions: The Digital Humanities Hub
                     and the History Department of Lancaster University, UK; The Instituto de
                     Engenharia de Sistemas e Computadores, Investigação e Desenvolvimento em Lisboa,
                     INESC–ID, University of Lisbon, Portugal; and the Instituto Nacional de
                     Antropología e Historia in México. The website of the project can be accessed at:
                     <a href="http://www.lancaster.ac.uk/digging-ecm" onclick="window.open('http://www.lancaster.ac.uk/digging-ecm'); return false" class="ref">http://www.lancaster.ac.uk/digging-ecm</a>. </span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e385"><span class="noteRef lang en">[2] NLP techniques have often been applied to annotated
                     texts written in modern English, and a few have been tried with historical
                     documents composed in earlier forms of speech in several languages [<a class="ref" href="#borin2007">Borin et al. 2007</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#brooke2015">Brooke et al. 2015</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#byrne2007">Byrne 2007</a>]
                     <span class="error"><a class="ref" href="#crane2006">#crane2006</a></span>
                     [<a class="ref" href="#ehrmann2016">Ehrmann et al. 2016</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#grover2008">Grover et al. 2008</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#sprugnoli2017">Sprugnoli et al. 2017</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#vanhooland2015">Van Hooland et al. 2015</a>]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#won2018">Won et al. 2018</a>].</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e471"><span class="noteRef lang en">[3] To give a complete picture of the
                     enquiry, we reproduce the questions list in Appendix 1. The questionnaire in
                     Spanish can also be found in <span class="error"><a href="#delagarza1983">De la Garza
                           (1983: 7-12)</a></span> and <a href="#acuna1982">Acuña (1982-1988,
                        vol. 1: 73-78)</a>, as well as in English publications by <span class="error"><a href="#nutall1926">Nutall (1926)</a></span>, <a href="#cline1964">Cline
                        (1964,</a>
                     <a href="#cline1972a">1972c: 234-237)</a>, <a href="#mundy1996">Mundy (1996: 227–230)</a>, and <span class="error"><a href="#bravo-garcia2018">Bravo-García (2018:
                           417-422)</a></span>.</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e510"><span class="noteRef lang en">[4] The
                     census of these RGs published by <a href="#cline1964">Cline (1964</a>, <a href="#cline1972d">1972d</a>) and updated by <a href="#acuna1982">Acuña
                        (1982–1988)</a> enumerates 34 RGs from Antequera; 17 from Michoacán; 15 from
                     Tlaxcala; 54 from Yucatán; 2 from Guatemala; 34 from Mexico and 12 from Nueva
                     Galicia (i.e. Guadalajara), though <a href="#cline1972d">Cline (1972d)</a>
                     counts only 33 from Mexico. The collection is spread across four repositories: 80
                     documents are in the Archivo General de Indias in Seville; 46 in the Real Academia
                     de la Historia in Madrid; 41 in the Latin American Collection of the Benson
                     Library, University of Texas; and one in the Glasgow University Library. Two
                     handmade transcriptions of the RGs, made by Joaquín García Icazbalceta, are now in
                     the National Library of Mexico City [<a class="ref" href="#cline1964">Cline 1964</a>, 359]
                     [<a class="ref" href="#acuna1982">Acuña 1982-8</a>, 9].</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e538"><span class="noteRef lang en">[5]  The latest
                     comprehensive analysis of these maps is by <a href="#mundy1996">Mundy
                        (1996)</a>.</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e743"><span class="noteRef lang en">[6] For instance, Antequera is now Oaxaca.</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e746"><span class="noteRef lang en">[7] In one example,
                     sixteenth–century Cempoala (Hidalgo) moved from a hill to a valley to
                     guarantee access to water, which caused severe alterations on its
                     limits.</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e749"><span class="noteRef lang en">[8] Tetlapayac, for instance, is the modern Santiago
                     Teltlapayac.</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e752"><span class="noteRef lang en">[9] Quauhyocan is also written as Quacyocan, for example.</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e755"><span class="noteRef lang en">[10] For example, ancient Quahnahuac is modern
                     Cuernavaca.</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e759"><span class="noteRef lang en">[11] Tetela, for instance,
                     refers both to a town in modern Morelos and to a settlement in Puebla, and
                     towns called Atlatlauhca can be found both in Morelos — origin of an RG —
                     and Oaxaca.</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e824"><span class="noteRef lang en">[12] 
                     <a href="http://www.cdi.gob.mx/localidades2010-gobmx/" onclick="window.open('http://www.cdi.gob.mx/localidades2010-gobmx/'); return false" class="ref">http://www.cdi.gob.mx/localidades2010-gobmx/</a>
                     </span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e830"><span class="noteRef lang en">[13] 
                     <a href="http://registropublico.inah.gob.mx/index.php" onclick="window.open('http://registropublico.inah.gob.mx/index.php'); return false" class="ref">http://registropublico.inah.gob.mx/index.php</a>
                     </span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e836"><span class="noteRef lang en">[14] 
                     <a href="http://www.geonames.org/" onclick="window.open('http://www.geonames.org/'); return false" class="ref">http://www.geonames.org/</a>
                     </span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e842"><span class="noteRef lang en">[15] 
                     <a href="http://www.getty.edu/research/tools/vocabularies/tgn/index.html" onclick="window.open('http://www.getty.edu/research/tools/vocabularies/tgn/index.html'); return false" class="ref">http://www.getty.edu/research/tools/vocabularies/tgn/index.html</a>
                     </span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e851"><span class="noteRef lang en">[16] 
                     <a href="http://www.getty.edu/research/tools/vocabularies/tgn/" onclick="window.open('http://www.getty.edu/research/tools/vocabularies/tgn/'); return false" class="ref">http://www.getty.edu/research/tools/vocabularies/tgn/</a></span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e860"><span class="noteRef lang en">[17] <a href="http://whgazetteer.org" onclick="window.open('http://whgazetteer.org'); return false" class="ref">http://whgazetteer.org</a></span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e922"><span class="noteRef lang en">[18] <a href="www.tagtog.net" onclick="window.open('www.tagtog.net'); return false" class="ref">www.tagtog.net</a></span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e1001"><span class="noteRef lang en">[19] 
                     <a href="https://www.corpusdelespanol.org" onclick="window.open('https://www.corpusdelespanol.org'); return false" class="ref">https://www.corpusdelespanol.org</a>
                     </span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e1270"><span class="noteRef lang en">[20] The premise of distance reading is that there are
                     simply too many documents for anyone to read and study simultaneously and within
                     the limits of the human brain and under the time imposed by contemporary academic
                     schedules.</span></div>
               <div class="endnote" id="d4e1314"><span class="noteRef lang en">[21] Reproduced from Mundy,
                     Barbara. 1996. The mapping of New Spain. Indigenous cartography and the maps of
                     the Relaciones Geográficas, Appendix B, pp. 227-230. Chicago: The University of
                     Chicago Press.</span></div>
            </div>
            <div id="worksCited">
               <h2>Works Cited</h2>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="d4e1882">
                     <!-- close --></span>García Cubas, Antonio. 1888-1891. <cite class="title italic">Diccionario geográfico,
                     histórico y biográfico de los Estados Unidos Mexicanos</cite>. 2 vols. México:
                  Antigua Impr. de Murguía. <a href="https://catalog.hathitrust.org/Record/010416157" onclick="window.open('https://catalog.hathitrust.org/Record/010416157'); return false" class="ref">https://catalog.hathitrust.org/Record/010416157</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="acuna1982">
                     <!-- close -->Acuña 1982-8</span> Acuña, René. 1982–1988. <cite class="title italic">Relaciones Geográficas del siglo XVI</cite>, 10 vols. México:
                  Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México. Instituto de Investigaciones Antropológicas.
                  <a href="https://books.google.com/books/about/Relaciones_Geogr%C3%A1ficas_Del_Siglo_XVI.html?id=XuQ0834CgVAC" onclick="window.open('https://books.google.com/books/about/Relaciones_Geogr%C3%A1ficas_Del_Siglo_XVI.html?id=XuQ0834CgVAC'); return false" class="ref">https://books.google.com/books/about/Relaciones_Geogr%C3%A1ficas_Del_Siglo_XVI.html?id=XuQ0834CgVAC</a></div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="acuna-soto2004">
                     <!-- close -->Acuña–Soto et al. 2004</span> Acuña–Soto, Rodolfo, David
                  W. Stahle, Matthew D. Therrell, Richard D. Griffin, and Malcolm K. Cleaveland. 2004.
                  “When half of the population died: The epidemic of hemorrhagic
                  fevers of 1576 in Mexico”. <cite class="title italic">FEMS Microbiology
                     Letters</cite> 240(1): 1–5. doi:<a href="10.1016/j.femsle.2004.09.011" onclick="window.open('10.1016/j.femsle.2004.09.011'); return false" class="ref">10.1016/j.femsle.2004.09.011</a></div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="alboreszarate2015">
                     <!-- close -->Albores Zarate 2015</span> Albores Zarate, B. (Ed.).
                  2015. <cite class="title italic">Flor-flora: Su uso ritual en Mesoamérica</cite>. Toluca
                  de Lerdo, Estado de México : Fondo Editorial Estado de México; El Colegio
                  Mexiquense.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="alpert-abrams2016">
                     <!-- close -->Alpert-Abrams 2016</span> Alpert–Abrams, Hannah. 2016.
                  “Machine reading the <cite class="title italic">Primeros
                     Libros</cite>”, <cite class="title italic">DHQ: Digital Humanities
                     Quaterly</cite> 10(4). <a href="http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/10/4/000268/000268.html" onclick="window.open('http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/10/4/000268/000268.html'); return false" class="ref">http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/10/4/000268/000268.html</a></div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="anayamonroy1960">
                     <!-- close -->Anaya Monroy1960</span> Anaya Monroy, Fernando. 1960.
                  “Presencia espiritual de la cultura náhuatl en la
                  toponimia”. <cite class="title italic">Estudios de Cultura Náhuatl</cite> 2:
                  9–25.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="barlow1949">
                     <!-- close -->Barlow 1949</span> Barlow, Robert H. 1949. “Relación de Zempoala y su partido, 1580”. <cite class="title italic">Tlalocan. Revista de Fuentes para el Conocimiento de las Culturas
                     Indígenas de México</cite> 3(1): 29-41.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="ballesteros2005">
                     <!-- close -->Bellesteros García 2005</span> Ballesteros García,
                  Víctor Manuel. 2005.<cite class="title italic">La Pintura de la Relación de Zempoala de
                     1580</cite>. México: Universidad Autónoma del Estado de Hidalgo.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="borin2007">
                     <!-- close -->Borin et al. 2007</span> Borin, Lars, Dimitrios Kokkinakis,
                  and Leif–Jöran Olsson. 2007. “Naming the past: Named entity and
                  animacy recognition in 19th century Swedish literature”. In <cite class="title italic">Proceedings of the Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural
                     Heritage Data (LaTeCH 2007)</cite>, pp. 1–8. Prague, Czech Republic: Association
                  for Computational Linguistics. <a href="http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W/W07/W07%E2%80%930901.pdf" onclick="window.open('http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W/W07/W07–0901.pdf'); return false" class="ref">http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W/W07/W07–0901.pdf</a></div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="brand1960">
                     <!-- close -->Brand 1960</span> Brand, Donald. 1960. <cite class="title italic">Coalcoman and Motines del Oro, an ex-Distrito of Michoacan, México</cite>.
                  Austin: University of Texas, Institute of Latin American Studies.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="bravo-garvia2019">
                     <!-- close -->Bravo-García 2019</span> Bravo-García, Eva. 2019.
                  <cite class="title italic">Las voces del contacto. Edición y estudio de Las Relaciones
                     Geográficas de México (Siglo XVI)</cite>. Warsaw: University of Warsaw. 
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="brooke2015">
                     <!-- close -->Brooke et al. 2015</span> Brooke, Julian, Adam Hammond, and
                  Graeme Hirst. 2015. “GutenTag: An NLP–driven tool for digital
                  humanities research in the project Gutenberg Corpus”. In <cite class="title italic">Proceedings of the North American Association for Computational
                     Linguistics</cite>, pp. 1–6. Denver, Colorado. <a href="http://www.cs.toronto.edu/pub/gh/Brooke%E2%80%93etal%E2%80%932015%E2%80%93CLfL.pdf" onclick="window.open('http://www.cs.toronto.edu/pub/gh/Brooke–etal–2015–CLfL.pdf'); return false" class="ref">http://www.cs.toronto.edu/pub/gh/Brooke–etal–2015–CLfL.pdf</a></div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="byrne2007">
                     <!-- close -->Byrne 2007</span> Byrne, Kate. 2007. “Nested named entity recognition in historical archive text”. In <cite class="title italic">International Conference on Semantic Computing (ICSC 2007)</cite>.
                  Irvine, CA, USA: IEEE. Doi:10.1109/ICSC.2007.107.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="chavezmejia2020">
                     <!-- close -->Chávez Mejía et al. 2020</span> Chávez Mejía, M.C., L.
                  White Olascoaga, S. Moctezuma Pérez, F. Herrera Tapia. 2020. “Practicas curativas y plantas medicinales: Un acercamiento a la etnomedicina de
                  San Nicolás, México”. <cite class="title italic">Cuadernos Geográficos</cite>,
                  56(2): 26. <a href="http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&amp;db=edb&amp;AN=124569245&amp;lang=es&amp;site=eds-live" onclick="window.open('http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&amp;db=edb&amp;AN=124569245&amp;lang=es&amp;site=eds-live'); return false" class="ref">http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&amp;db=edb&amp;AN=124569245&amp;lang=es&amp;site=eds-live</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="cline1964">
                     <!-- close -->Cline 1964</span> Cline, Howard F. 1964. The “Relaciones Geográficas of the Spanish Indies, 1577–1586”.
                  <cite class="title italic">The Hispanic American Historical Review</cite> 44(3):
                  341–374. doi:10.2307/2511856.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="cline1972a">
                     <!-- close -->Cline 1972a</span> Cline, Howard F. 1972a. “Introductory notes on territorial divisions of Middle
                  America”. In <cite class="title italic">Handbook of Middle American Indians,
                     Volume 12: Guide to Ethnohistorical Sources, Part One</cite>, edited by Howard F.
                  Cline, pp. 17–62. Austin: University of Texas Press.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="cline1972b">
                     <!-- close -->Cline 1972b</span> Cline, Howard F. 1972b. “Ethnohistorical regions of Middle America”. In <cite class="title italic">Handbook of Middle American Indians, Volume 12: Guide to
                     Ethnohistorical Sources, Part One</cite>, edited by Howard F. Cline, pp. 166–182.
                  Austin: University of Texas Press.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="cline1972c">
                     <!-- close -->Cline 1972c</span> Cline, Howard F. 1972c. “The Relaciones Geográficas of the Spanish Indies, 1577–1648”.
                  In <cite class="title italic">Handbook of Middle American Indians, Volume 12: Guide to
                     Ethnohistorical Sources, Part One</cite>, edited by Howard F. Cline, pp. 183–242.
                  Austin: University of Texas Press.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="cline1972d">
                     <!-- close -->Cline 1972d</span> Cline, Howard F. 1972d. “A census of the <cite class="title italic">Relaciones Geográficas</cite>
                  of New Spain, 1579–1612”. In <cite class="title italic">Handbook of Middle
                     American Indians, Volume 12: Guide to Ethnohistorical Sources, Part One</cite>,
                  edited by Howard F. Cline, pp. 364–369. Austin: University of Texas Press.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="cooper2011">
                     <!-- close -->Cooper and Gregory 2011</span> Cooper, David, and Ian N
                  Gregory. 2011. “Mapping the English Lake District: A literary
                  GIS”. <cite class="title italic">Transactions of the Institute of British
                     Geographers</cite> 36(1): 89–108. doi:10.1111/j.1475–5661.2010.00405.x.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="cacereslorenzo2013">
                     <!-- close -->Cáceres Lorenzo 2013</span> Cáceres Lorenzo, María
                  Teresa. 2013. “Tipos de Relaciones Geográficas en el siglo
                  XVI”. <cite class="title italic">Crítica Hispánica</cite> 35(1): 45-66.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="cacereslorenzo2016">
                     <!-- close -->Cáceres Lorenzo 2016</span> Cáceres Lorenzo, María
                  Teresa. 2016. “Heteregeneidad léxica en las Relaciones
                  Geográficas de Yucatán”, <cite class="title italic">Alpha. Revista de Artes,
                     Letras y Filosofía</cite>, 42 (online) <a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.4067/S0718-22012016000100007" onclick="window.open('http://dx.doi.org/10.4067/S0718-22012016000100007'); return false" class="ref">http://dx.doi.org/10.4067/S0718-22012016000100007</a>; <a href="https://scielo.conicyt.cl/scielo.php?script=sci_arttext&amp;pid=S0718-22012016000100007" onclick="window.open('https://scielo.conicyt.cl/scielo.php?script=sci_arttext&amp;pid=S0718-22012016000100007'); return false" class="ref">https://scielo.conicyt.cl/scielo.php?script=sci_arttext&amp;pid=S0718-22012016000100007</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="dahlgren1954">
                     <!-- close -->Dahlgren de Jordan 1954</span> Dahlgren de Jordan, Barbro.
                  1954. <cite class="title quotes">La Mixteca: su cultura e historia
                     prehispánicas</cite>. México: Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México. De la
                  Garza, Mercedes (Ed.). 1983. <cite class="title italic">Relaciones histórico–geográficas de
                     la gobernación de Yucatán: (Mérida, Valladolid y Tabasco).</cite> First edition,
                  2 vols. México: Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="delpaso1905">
                     <!-- close -->Del Paso y Troncoso 1905</span> Del Paso y Troncoso,
                  Francisco (Ed.). 1905. <cite class="title italic">Papeles de Nueva España</cite>. Segunda
                  Serie: Geografía y Estadística, vols. 1, 3–7. Madrid: Sucesores de
                  Rivadeneyra.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="delgadolopez2010">
                     <!-- close -->Delgado López 2010</span> Delgado López, Enrique. 2010.
                  “Las Relaciones Geográficas como proyecto científico en los
                  albores de la modernidad”. <cite class="title italic">Estudios
                     Mesoamericanos</cite> 2(9): 97–106.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="donaldson2015">
                     <!-- close -->Donaldson et al. 2015</span> Donaldson, Christopher, Ian
                  N. Gregory, and Patricia Murrieta–Flores. 2015. “Mapping
                  ‘Wordsworthshire’: A GIS study of literary tourism in Victorian
                  Lakeland”. <cite class="title italic">Journal of Victorian Culture</cite> 20(3):
                  287–307. doi:10.1080/13555502.2015.1058089.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="donaldson2017">
                     <!-- close -->Donaldson et al. 2017</span> Donaldson, Christopher, Ian
                  N. Gregory, and Joanna E. Taylor. 2017. “Locating the beautiful,
                  picturesque, sublime and majestic: Spatially analysing the application of
                  aesthetic terminology in descriptions of the English Lake District”. <cite class="title italic">Journal of Historical Geography</cite> 56 (April): 43–60.
                  doi:10.1016/j.jhg.2017.01.006.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="ducke2008">
                     <!-- close -->Ducke and Kroefges 2008</span> Ducke, Benjamin and Peter C.
                  Kroefges. 2008. “Layers of Perception”. <cite class="title italic">Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Computer
                     Applications and Quantitative Methods in Archaeology (CAA2007)</cite>, Berlin,
                  Germany, April 2–6, edited by Axel Posluschny, Karsten Lambers, and Irmela Herzog,
                  pp. 246-251. (Kolloquien zur Vor- und Frühgeschichte, Vol. 10). Bonn: Dr. Rudolf
                  Habelt GmbH. <a href="https://proceedings.caaconference.org/paper/78_ducke_kroefges_caa2007/" onclick="window.open('https://proceedings.caaconference.org/paper/78_ducke_kroefges_caa2007/'); return false" class="ref">https://proceedings.caaconference.org/paper/78_ducke_kroefges_caa2007/</a>. 
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="edwards1969">
                     <!-- close -->Edwards 1969</span> Edwards, Clinton R. 1969. “Mapping by questionnaire: An early Spanish attempt to determine New
                  World geographic positions”. <cite class="title italic">Imago Mundi</cite> 23:
                  17–28.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="ehrmann2016">
                     <!-- close -->Ehrmann et al. 2016</span> Ehrmann, Maud, Giovanni
                  Colavizza, Yannick Rochat, and Frédéric Kaplan. 2016. “Diachronic
                  evaluation of NER systems on old newspapers”. In <cite class="title italic">Proceedings of the 13th Conference on Natural Language Processing (KONVENS
                     2016))</cite>, edited by Stephanie Dipper, Friedrich Neubarth, and Heike
                  Zinsmeister, pp. 97–107. Bochum, Germany: Bochumer Linguistische Arbeitsberichte.
                  <a href="http://infoscience.epfl.ch/record/221391" onclick="window.open('http://infoscience.epfl.ch/record/221391'); return false" class="ref">http://infoscience.epfl.ch/record/221391</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="eynard2012">
                     <!-- close -->Eynard et al. 2012</span> Eynard, Davide, Matteo Matteucci,
                  and Fabio Marfia. 2012. “A modular framework to learn seed
                  ontologies from text”. In <cite class="title italic">Semi-automatic ontology
                     development processes and resources</cite>, edited by Maria Teresa Pazienza and
                  Armando Stellato, pp. 22-47. Hershey, PA: IGI Publishing.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="favilavazquez2019">
                     <!-- close -->Favila Vázquez 2019</span> Favila Vázquez, Mariana.
                  2019. “La navegación prehispánica: Un sistema de conectividad del
                  paisaje mesoamericano. Modelo de interacción entre la costa del Pacífico y el
                  Altiplano Central (Postclásico Tardío-Siglo XVI)”. PhD Thesis, México:
                  Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México. Facultada de Filosofía y Letras, Instituto
                  de Investigaciones Filológicas. Programa de Maestría y Doctorado en Estudios
                  Mesoamericanos.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="fernandez2006">
                     <!-- close -->Fernández Christlieb 2006</span> Fernández Christlieb,
                  Federico and Gustavo Garza Merodio. 2006. “La pintura de la
                  Relación Geográfica de Metztitlán, 1579”. <cite class="title italic">Secuencia.
                     Revista de historia y ciencias sociales</cite> 66: 160-186.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="gerhard1972a">
                     <!-- close -->Gerhard 1972a</span> Gerhard, Peter. 1972a. <cite class="title italic">A Guide to the historical geography of New Spain</cite>. First
                  edition. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="gerhard1972b">
                     <!-- close -->Gerhard 1972b</span> Gerhard, Peter. 1972b. “Colonial New Spain, 1519–1786: Historical notes on the evolution of
                  minor political jurisdictions”. In <cite class="title italic">Handbook of Middle
                     American Indians, Volume 12: Guide to Ethnohistorical Sources, Part One</cite>,
                  edited by Howard F. Cline, pp. 63–137. Austin: University of Texas Press.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="gerhard1991">
                     <!-- close -->Gerhard 1991</span> Gerhard, Peter. 1991. <cite class="title italic">La frontera sureste de la Nueva España</cite>. México: Universidad
                  Nacional Autónoma de México.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="gibson1967">
                     <!-- close -->Gibson 1967</span> Gibson, Charles. 1967. <cite class="title italic">Tlaxcala in the sixteenth century</cite>. California: Stanford
                  University Press.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="goldberg2017">
                     <!-- close -->Goldberg 2017</span> Goldberg, Yoav. 2017. “Neural network methods for natural language processing”.
                  <cite class="title italic">Synthesis Lectures on Human Language Technologies</cite>
                  10(1): 1-309. doi:10.2200/S00762ED1V01Y201703HLT037.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="gregory2006">
                     <!-- close -->Gregory and Jones 2006</span> Crane, Gregory, and Alison
                  Jones. 2006. “The challenge of Virginia Banks: An evaluation of
                  named entity analysis in a 19th–century newspaper collection”. In <cite class="title italic">Proceedings of the 6th ACM/IEEE–CS Joint Conference on Digital
                     Libraries (JCDL ‘06)</cite>, Chapel Hill, NC, USA: ACM Press.
                  doi:10.1145/1141753.1141759.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="gregory2015">
                     <!-- close -->Gregory et al. 2015</span> Gregory, Ian, Christopher E.
                  Donaldson, Patricia Murrieta–Flores, and Paul E. Rayson. 2015. “Geoparsing, GIS, and textual analysis: Current developments in spatial humanities
                  research”. <cite class="title italic">International Journal of Humanities and
                     Arts Computing</cite> 9(1): 1–14. doi:10.3366/ijhac.2015.0135.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="gregory2018">
                     <!-- close -->Gregory et al. 2018</span> Gregory, Ian Norman, Christopher
                  E. Donaldson, Andrew Hardie, and Paul E. Rayson. 2018. “Modelling
                  Space in Historical Texts”. In <cite class="title italic">The shape of data in
                     Digital Humanities: Modeling texts and text–based resources</cite>, edited by
                  Julia Flanders and Fotis Jannidis. London: Routledge. <a href="http://eprints.lancs.ac.uk/81427/" onclick="window.open('http://eprints.lancs.ac.uk/81427/'); return false" class="ref">http://eprints.lancs.ac.uk/81427/</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="grover2008">
                     <!-- close -->Grover et al. 2008</span> Grover, C., S. Givon, R. Tobin, and
                  J. Ball. 2008. “Named entity recognition for digitised historical
                  texts”. In <cite class="title italic">Proceedings of the Sixth International
                     Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’08)</cite>. Paris:
                  ELRA.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="gruzinski1991">
                     <!-- close -->Gruzinski 1991</span> Gruzinski, Serge. 1991. <cite class="title italic">La colonización de lo imaginario. Sociedades indígenas y
                     occidentalización en el México español. Siglos XVI-XVIII</cite>. México: Fondo de
                  Cultura Económica (original in French, <cite class="title italic">La colonization de
                     l´imaginaire, Sociètés indigènes et occidentalisation dans le Mexique espagnol
                     XVI-XVIII e siècle</cite>. Paris: Editions Gallimard, 1988).
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="guzman1987">
                     <!-- close -->Guzmán Betancourt 1987</span> Guzmán Betancourt, Ignacio
                  (Ed.). 1987. <cite class="title italic">De toponimia y topónimos. Contribuciones al estudio
                     de los nombres de lugar provenientes de lenguas indígenas de México</cite>.
                  México: Instituto Nacional de Antropología e Historia.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="guzman1989">
                     <!-- close -->Guzmán Betancourt 1989</span> Guzmán Betancourt, Ignacio.
                  1989. <cite class="title italic">Toponimia mexicana. Bibliografía general</cite>. México:
                  Instituto Nacional de Antropología e Historia.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="guzman1998">
                     <!-- close -->Guzmán Betancourt 1998</span> Guzmán Betancourt, Ignacio, ed.
                  1998. <cite class="title italic">Los nombres de México</cite>. México: Secretaría de
                  Relaciones Exteriores.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="gómez2004">
                     <!-- close -->Gómez 2004</span> Gómez, Raúl. 2004. <cite class="title italic">Los
                     Virreinatos americanos</cite>. Madrid: Dastin Export.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="halterman2017">
                     <!-- close -->Halternamn 2017</span> Halterman, Andrew. 2017. “Mordecai: Full text geoparsing and event geocoding”. <cite class="title italic">The Journal of Open Source Software,</cite> 2 (January): 91.
                  doi:10.21105/joss.00091.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="harvery1972">
                     <!-- close -->Harvey 1972</span> Harvey, H. R. 1972. “The Relaciones Geográficas, 1579-1586: Native Languages”. In <cite class="title italic">Handbook of Middle American Indians, Volume 12: Guide to
                     Ethnohistorical Sources, Part One</cite>, edited by Howard F. Cline, pp. 279–323.
                  Austin: University of Texas Press.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="hersch1999">
                     <!-- close -->Hersch 1999</span> Hersch, Martinez, P. (1999). “De hierbas y herbolarios en el Mexico actual”. <cite class="title italic">Arqueología Mexicana</cite>, 39:60-65.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="hill2000">
                     <!-- close -->Hill 2000</span> Hill, Linda L. 2000. “Core
                  elements of digital gazetteers: Placenames, categories, and footprints”. In
                  <cite class="title italic">Research and advanced technology for digital
                     libraries</cite>, pp. 280–290. Lecture Notes in Computer Science 1923. Berlin:
                  Springer. doi:10.1007/3–540–45268–0_26.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="hill1999">
                     <!-- close -->Hill et al. 1999</span> Hill, Linda, James Frew, and Qi Zheng.
                  1999. “Geographic names: The implementation of a gazetteer in a
                  georeferenced digital library”. <cite class="title italic">D–Lib Magazine</cite>
                  5(1). doi:10.1045/january99–hill.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="lefebvre2017">
                     <!-- close -->Lefebvre and Martínez 2017</span> Lefebvre, Karin and
                  Carlos Paredes Martínez, eds. 2017. <cite class="title italic">La memoria de los nombres:
                     la toponimia en la conformación histórica del territorio. De Mesoamérica a
                     México</cite>. Morelia, Michoacán: Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México,
                  Centro de Investigaciones en Geografía Ambiental. <a href="http://www.h%E2%80%93mexico.unam.mx/node/19835" onclick="window.open('http://www.h–mexico.unam.mx/node/19835'); return false" class="ref">http://www.h–mexico.unam.mx/node/19835</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="leonportilla2002">
                     <!-- close -->León Portilla 2002</span> León Portilla, Miguel. 2002.
                  “El destino de las lenguas indígenas de México”. In
                  <cite class="title italic">El despertar de nuestras lenguas (Queman tlachixque
                     totlahtolhuan)</cite>, edited by Natalio Hernández. México: Editorial Diana,
                  Fondo Editorial de las Culturas Indígenas.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="liceras-garrido2019">
                     <!-- close -->Liceras-Garrido et al. 2019</span> Liceras-Garrido,
                  Raquel, Mariana Favila-Vázquez, Katherine Bellamy, Patricia Murrieta-Flores, Diego
                  Jiménez-Badillo, et al. 2019. “Digital Approaches to Historical
                  Archaeology: Exploring the Geographies of 16th Century New Spain”. <cite class="title italic">Open Access Journal of Archaeology &amp; Anthropology</cite> 2(1).
                  OAJAA.MS.ID.000526. DOI: 10.33552/OAJAA.2019.02.000526.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="lopezdevelasco1894">
                     <!-- close -->López de Velasco 1894</span> López de Velasco, Juan.
                  1894. <cite class="title italic">Geografía y descripción universal de las Indias</cite>.
                  Madrid: D. Justo Zaragoza: Establecimiento tipográfico de Fortanet. <a href="http://www.cervantesvirtual.com/obra%E2%80%93visor/geografa%E2%80%93y%E2%80%93descripcin%E2%80%93universal%E2%80%93de%E2%80%93las%E2%80%93indias%E2%80%93recopilada%E2%80%93por%E2%80%93el%E2%80%93cosmgrafocronista%E2%80%93juan%E2%80%93lpez%E2%80%93de%E2%80%93velasco%E2%80%93desde%E2%80%93el%E2%80%93ao%E2%80%93de%E2%80%931571%E2%80%93al%E2%80%93de%E2%80%931574%E2%80%93publicada%E2%80%93por%E2%80%93d%E2%80%93justo%E2%80%93zaragoza%E2%80%930/html/" onclick="window.open('http://www.cervantesvirtual.com/obra–visor/geografa–y–descripcin–universal–de–las–indias–recopilada–por–el–cosmgrafocronista–juan–lpez–de–velasco–desde–el–ao–de–1571–al–de–1574–publicada–por–d–justo–zaragoza–0/html/'); return false" class="ref">http://www.cervantesvirtual.com/obra–visor/geografa–y–descripcin–universal–de–las–indias–recopilada–por–el–cosmgrafocronista–juan–lpez–de–velasco–desde–el–ao–de–1571–al–de–1574–publicada–por–d–justo–zaragoza–0/html/</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="mager2018">
                     <!-- close -->Mager et al. 2018</span> Mager, Manuel, Ximena
                  Gutierrez–Vasques, Gerardo Sierra, and Ivan Meza. 2018. “Challenges of language technologies for the indigenous languages of the
                  Americas”. In <cite class="title italic">Proceedings of the 27th International
                     Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING 2018).</cite>
                  <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/1806.04291" onclick="window.open('https://arxiv.org/abs/1806.04291'); return false" class="ref">https://arxiv.org/abs/1806.04291</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="martins2017">
                     <!-- close -->Martins and Murrieta-Flores 2017</span> Martins, Bruno, and
                  Patricia Murrieta–Flores. 2017. “GeoHumanities 2017 workshop
                  report”. In <cite class="title italic">Proceedings of the 1st ACM SIGSPATIAL
                     Workshop on Geospatial Humanities</cite>, Redondo Beach, California, USA.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="morato-moreno2017">
                     <!-- close -->Morato-Moreno 2017</span> Morato-Moreno, Manuel. 2017.
                  “The Map of Tlacotalpa by Francisco Gali, 1580: An early
                  example of a local coastal chart in Spanish America”. <cite class="title italic">The Cartographic Journal</cite> 55(1): 3-15. 
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="morenotoscano1968">
                     <!-- close -->Moreno Toscano 1968</span> Moreno Toscano, Alejandra.
                  1968. <cite class="title italic">Geografía económica de México (siglo XVI)</cite>. México:
                  El Colegio de México.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="mundy1996">
                     <!-- close -->Mundy 1996</span> Mundy, Barbara. 1996. <cite class="title italic">The mapping of New Spain: Indigenous cartography and the maps of the Relaciones
                     Geograficas</cite>. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="mundy2013">
                     <!-- close -->Mundy 2013</span> Mundy, Barbara E. 2013. “Mapping Babel: A 16th Century Indigenous Map from Mexico”. <cite class="title italic">The Appendix: A New Journal of Narrative &amp; Experimental
                     History</cite>. Online publication available at: <a href="http://theappendix.net/issues/2013/10/mapping-babel-a-sixteenth-century-indigenous-map-from-mexico" onclick="window.open('http://theappendix.net/issues/2013/10/mapping-babel-a-sixteenth-century-indigenous-map-from-mexico'); return false" class="ref">http://theappendix.net/issues/2013/10/mapping-babel-a-sixteenth-century-indigenous-map-from-mexico</a>
                  
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="mundy2014">
                     <!-- close -->Mundy 2014</span> Mundy, Barbara E. 2014. “Place–names in Mexico–Tenochtitlan”. <cite class="title italic">Ethnohistory</cite> 61 (2): 329–355. doi:10.1215/00141801–2414190.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="muntzel2010">
                     <!-- close -->Muntzel and Molina 2010</span> Muntzel, Martha C., and
                  María Elena Villegas Molina, (Eds.). 2010. <cite class="title italic">Itinerario
                     toponímico de México: Ignacio Guzmán Betancourt</cite>. México: Instituto
                  Nacional de Antropología e Historia.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="murrieta-flores2017b">
                     <!-- close -->Murrieta-Flores and Gregory 2017</span> Murrieta–Flores, Patricia, and Ian N. Gregory. 2017. “Cruzando
                  Fronteras en humanidades digitales: Análisis geográfico de textos de interés
                  histórico y arqueológico con sistemas de información geográfica”. In <cite class="title italic">Arqueología computacional. Nuevos enfoques para la documentación,
                     análisis y difusión del patrimonio cultural</cite>, edited by Diego
                  Jiménez–Badillo, pp. 199–212. México: Instituto Nacional de Antropología e
                  Historia.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="murrieta-flores2015">
                     <!-- close -->Murrieta-Flores et al. 2015</span> Murrieta–Flores,
                  Patricia, Alistair Baron, Ian Gregory, Andrew Hardie, and Paul Rayson. 2015. “Automatically analyzing large texts in a GIS environment: The
                  Registrar General’s Reports and cholera in the 19th century”. <cite class="title italic">Transactions in GIS</cite> 19(2): 296–320.
                  doi:10.1111/tgis.12106.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="murrieta-flores2017a">
                     <!-- close -->Murrieta-Flores et al. 2017</span> Murrieta–Flores,
                  Patricia, Christopher Donaldson, and Ian N Gregory. 2017. “GIS
                  and literary history: Advancing digital humanities research through the spatial
                  analysis of eighteenth–century travel writing”. <cite class="title italic">Digital Humanities Quarterly</cite> 11(1). <a href="http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/11/1/000283/000283.html" onclick="window.open('http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/11/1/000283/000283.html'); return false" class="ref">http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/11/1/000283/000283.html</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="márquez1998">
                     <!-- close -->Márquez and Wold 1998</span> Márquez, Ofelia, and Lilian
                  Ramos Navarro Wold. 1998. <cite class="title italic">Compilation of colonial Spanish terms
                     and document related phrases</cite>. Midway City, CA: SHAR Press (Society of
                  Historical and Ancestral Research). <a href="http://www.somosprimos.com/spanishterms/spanishterms.htm" onclick="window.open('http://www.somosprimos.com/spanishterms/spanishterms.htm'); return false" class="ref">http://www.somosprimos.com/spanishterms/spanishterms.htm</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="nick2017">
                     <!-- close -->Nick and Tent 2017</span> Nick, I. M., and Jan Tent. 2017.
                  “Guest editorial on indigenous names and toponyms”.
                  <cite class="title italic">Names, A Journal of Onomastics</cite> 65(4): 190–193.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="nuttall1926">
                     <!-- close -->Nuttall 1926</span> Nuttall, Zellia, (Ed.). 1926. <cite class="title">Official reports on the towns of Tequizistlan, Tepechpan, Acolman,
                     and San Juan Teotihuacan, sent by Francisco de Castañeda to His Majesty, Philip
                     II, and the Council of the Indies, in 1580</cite>. <cite class="title italic">Papers of
                     the Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology</cite>, 11(2): 45–84. Cambridge,
                  Massachusetts: Harvard University.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="pedrote2019">
                     <!-- close -->Pedrote Romero and Bravo-García 2019</span> Pedrote Romero,
                  Antonio and Eva Bravo-García. 2019. “La autoría de las Relaciones
                  Geográficas mexicanas: Las voces náhuatl a través de los redactores”.
                  <cite class="title italic">Anuario de Estudios Americanos, 76(1): 123-153.</cite>
                  Doi: <a href="https://doi.org/10.3989/aeamer.2019.1.06" onclick="window.open('https://doi.org/10.3989/aeamer.2019.1.06'); return false" class="ref">10.3989/aeamer.2019.1.06</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="penafiel1897">
                     <!-- close -->Peñafiel 1987</span> Peñafiel, Antonio. 1897. <cite class="title italic">Nomenclatura geográfica de México, etimologías de los nombres de
                     lugar correspondientes a los principales idiomas que se hablan en la
                     República</cite>. 3 vols. México: Oficina tipográfica de la Secretaria de
                  Fomento. <a href="http://archive.org/details/nomenclaturageog00pe" onclick="window.open('http://archive.org/details/nomenclaturageog00pe'); return false" class="ref">http://archive.org/details/nomenclaturageog00pe</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="porter2015">
                     <!-- close -->Porter et al. 2015</span> Porter, Catherine, Paul Atkinson,
                  and Ian Gregory. 2015. “Geographical Text Analysis: A new
                  approach to understanding nineteenth–century mortality”. <cite class="title italic">Health &amp; Place,</cite> 36 (November): 25–34.
                  doi:10.1016/j.healthplace.2015.08.010.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="robelo1897">
                     <!-- close -->Robelo 1897</span> Robelo, Cecilio Agustín. 1897. <cite class="title italic">Nombres geográficos indígenas del estado de Morelos. Estudio crítico
                     de varias obras de Toponomatología nahoa</cite>. Cuernavaca: Luis G. Miranda,
                  impresor. <a href="http://archive.org/details/nombresgeogrfi00robeuoft" onclick="window.open('http://archive.org/details/nombresgeogrfi00robeuoft'); return false" class="ref">http://archive.org/details/nombresgeogrfi00robeuoft</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="robelo1900">
                     <!-- close -->Robelo 1900</span> Robelo, Cecilio Agustín. 1900. <cite class="title italic">Nombres Geográficos Indígenas Del Estado de México: Estudio Crítico
                     Etimológico</cite>. Cuernavaca: Luis G. Miranda impresor. <a href="http://cd.dgb.uanl.mx/handle/201504211/14251" onclick="window.open('http://cd.dgb.uanl.mx/handle/201504211/14251'); return false" class="ref">http://cd.dgb.uanl.mx//handle/201504211/14251</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="robelo1902a">
                     <!-- close -->Robelo 1902a</span> Robelo, Cecilio Agustín. 1902a. <cite class="title italic">Nombres geográficos mexicanos del estado de Veracruz: Estudio
                     critico etimológico</cite>. Cuernavaca: Luis G. Miranda impresor.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="robelo1902b">
                     <!-- close -->Robelo 1902b</span> Robelo, Cecilio Agustín. 1902b. <cite class="title italic">Toponimia tarasco-hispano-nahoa</cite>. Cuernavaca: Impr. de J. D.
                  Rojas. <a href="http://archive.org/details/toponimiatarasc00robegoog" onclick="window.open('http://archive.org/details/toponimiatarasc00robegoog'); return false" class="ref">http://archive.org/details/toponimiatarasc00robegoog</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="robelo1904">
                     <!-- close -->Robelo 1904</span> Robelo, Cecilio Agustín. 1904. <cite class="title italic">Diccionario de aztequismos, ó sea, catalogo de las palabras del
                     idioma nahuatl, azteca ó mexicano, introducidas al idioma castellano bajo diversas
                     formas.</cite> Cuernavaca: Printed by the author. <a href="https://catalog.hathitrust.org/Record/009024985" onclick="window.open('https://catalog.hathitrust.org/Record/009024985'); return false" class="ref">https://catalog.hathitrust.org/Record/009024985</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="robelo1905">
                     <!-- close -->Robelo 1905</span> Robelo, Cecilio Agustín. 1905. <cite class="title italic">Diccionario de mitología náhuatl</cite>. México: Ediciones Fuente
                  Cultural; Librería Navarro. <a href="https://catalog.hathitrust.org/Record/001940449" onclick="window.open('https://catalog.hathitrust.org/Record/001940449'); return false" class="ref">https://catalog.hathitrust.org/Record/001940449</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="robertson1972">
                     <!-- close -->Robertson 1972</span> Robertson, Donald. 1972. “The pinturas (maps) of the <cite class="title italic">Relaciones
                     Geográficas</cite> with a catalog”. In <cite class="title italic">Handbook of
                     Middle American Indians, Volume 12: Guide to Ethnohistorical Sources, Part
                     One</cite>, edited by Howard F. Cline, pp. 243–278. Austin: University of Texas
                  Press.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="santos2015">
                     <!-- close -->Santos et al. 2015</span> Santos, João, Ivo Anastácio, and
                  Bruno Martins. 2015. “Using machine learning methods for
                  disambiguating place references in textual documents”. <cite class="title italic">GeoJournal</cite> 80(3): 375–392. doi:10.1007/s10708–014–9553–y.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="snatos2017">
                     <!-- close -->Santos et al. 2017</span> Santos, Rui, Patricia
                  Murrieta–Flores, and Bruno Martins. 2017. “Learning to combine
                  multiple string similarity metrics for effective toponym matching”. <cite class="title italic">International Journal of Digital Earth</cite>.
                  doi:10.1080/17538947.2017.1371253.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="santos2018">
                     <!-- close -->Santos et al. 2018</span> Santos, Rui, Patricia
                  Murrieta–Flores, Pável Calado, and Bruno Martins. 2018. “Toponym
                  matching through deep neural networks”. <cite class="title italic">International
                     Journal of Geographical Information Science</cite> 32(2): 324–348.
                  doi:10.1080/13658816.2017.1390119.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="sprugnoli2017">
                     <!-- close -->Sprugnoli et al. 2017</span> Sprugnoli, Rachele, Giovanni
                  Moretti, Bruno Kessler, Sara Tonelli, and Stefano Menini. 2017. “Fifty years of European history through the lens of Computational Linguistics:
                  The De Gasperi Project”. <cite class="title italic">Italian Journal of
                     Computational Linguistics</cite> 2(2): 89–100.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="starr1920">
                     <!-- close -->Starr 1920</span> Starr, Frederick. 1920. <cite class="title italic">Aztec place-names, their meaning and mode of composition, selected from the
                     Spanish of Agustin de la Rosa, Antonio Peñafiel and Cecilio A. Robelo</cite>.
                  Chicago: Privately printed by the author. <a href="https://catalog.hathitrust.org/Record/001360976" onclick="window.open('https://catalog.hathitrust.org/Record/001360976'); return false" class="ref">https://catalog.hathitrust.org/Record/001360976</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="sanchez-martinez2013">
                     <!-- close -->Sánchez–Martínez et al. 2013</span> Sánchez–Martínez, Felipe, Isabel Martínez–Sempere, Xavier Ivars–Ribes, and Rafael
                  C.
                  Carrasco. 2013. “An Open diachronic corpus of historical Spanish:
                  Annotation criteria and automatic modernisation of spelling”. <cite class="title italic">arXiv:1306.3692 [cs]</cite>, June. <a href="http://arxiv.org/abs/1306.3692" onclick="window.open('http://arxiv.org/abs/1306.3692'); return false" class="ref">http://arxiv.org/abs/1306.3692</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="tanck2005">
                     <!-- close -->Tanck de Estrada 2005</span> Tanck de Estrada, Dorothy. 2005.
                  <cite class="title italic">Atlas ilustrado de los pueblos de indios</cite>. México: El
                  Colegio de México, El Colegio Mexiquense, Comisión Nacional para el Desarrollo de
                  los
                  Pueblos Indígenas, and Fomento Cultural Banamex.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="taule2008">
                     <!-- close -->Taulé et al. 2008</span> Taulé, Mariona, M. Antònia Martí, and
                  Marta Recasens. 2008. “AnCora: Multilevel annotated corpora for
                  Catalan and Spanish”. <cite class="title italic">LREC 2008</cite>. <a href="https://aclanthology.info/papers/L08%E2%80%931222/l08%E2%80%931222" onclick="window.open('https://aclanthology.info/papers/L08–1222/l08–1222'); return false" class="ref">https://aclanthology.info/papers/L08–1222/l08–1222</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="taylor2017">
                     <!-- close -->Taylor et al. 2017</span> Taylor, Joanna E., Ian N. Gregory,
                  and Christopher E. Donaldson. 2017. “Combining close and distant
                  reading: A multiscalar analysis of the English Lake District’s historical
                  soundscape”. <cite class="title italic">International Journal of Humanities and
                     Arts Computing</cite>, 12(2): 163-182. <a href="http://eprints.lancs.ac.uk/89167/" onclick="window.open('http://eprints.lancs.ac.uk/89167/'); return false" class="ref">http://eprints.lancs.ac.uk/89167/</a>.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="vanhooland2015">
                     <!-- close -->Van Hooland et al. 2015</span> Van Hooland, S., M. de
                  Wilde, R. Verborgh, T. Steiner, and R. Van de Walle. 2015. “Exploring entity recognition and disambiguation for cultural heritage
                  collections”. <cite class="title italic">Digital Scholarship in the
                     Humanities</cite> 30(2): 262–279. doi:10.1093/llc/fqt067.
               </div>
               <div class="bibl"><span class="ref" id="won2018">
                     <!-- close -->Won et al. 2018</span> Won, Miguel, Patricia Murrieta–Flores,
                  and Bruno Martins. 2018. “Ensemble named entity recognition
                  (NER): Evaluating NER Tools in the identification of place names in historical
                  corpora”. <cite class="title italic">Frontiers in Digital Humanities</cite> 5.
                  doi:10.3389/fdigh.2018.00002.
               </div>
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar"><a href="#">Preview</a>  |  <span style="color: grey">XML</span> |  <a href="#" onclick="javascript:window.print();" title="Click for print friendly version">Print Article</a></div>
         </div>
      </div>
   </body>
</html>